In conception, at least, like Tawney's study of the gentry, this Tawney Memorial Lecture seeks to put the economic structure of landed society into the framework of English political life. Its subject is what might be called the Edwardian revolution, possibly the greatest of all English aristocratic crises. The lecture falls into two main parts. The first deals with the finances and state of mind of great Edwardian landowners, particularly the finances and state of mind of Herbrand, 11th duke of Bedford, who was not only among the greatest of great landowners but was also in a way landed society's bellwether. The second deals with the politics of confrontation between great landowners and the Liberal Government, a confrontation that began with Lloyd George's 1909 Budget and ended with the mustering of armies, mainly in Ireland but also in England. It is a story of what had long been unknown in English society: aristocratic resistance to the duly constituted government.

To say that Bedford was landed society's bellwether needs qualification. He was not a conspicuous public figure; on succeeding to the family estates he made them his chief business, declining high political office. He had, however, firm and often passionate opinions on public affairs, especially concerning the Army and the taxation of landowners. What he said about the Army he said mainly in the House of Lords where he dwelt heavily on the Haldane reforms and England's unpreparedness for war, and their lordships were apt to flee his pronouncements. But what he said about landed finances and taxation he said mainly in a book, a highly unducal exercise, in which he dwelt on the shallows and miseries of agricultural depression, and here he held their lordships' attention. For in it he touched a chord of fear common to landowners in the late Victorian and Edwardian eras—a fear for the future of their wealth and political power.

Such fear was not new. Ever since the French Revolution the shadow of catastrophe had on occasion flitted through English aristocratic minds. About the 1880s the shadow deepened and something like the mood of a beleaguered noblesse began to take shape. For the first time, as if better to protect themselves, many aristocratic politicians sought refuge in a single political party, the Conservative or Tory or Unionist party, and put forward claims for the special authority of their own House as against the authority of the House of Commons. They did so the better to fend off what they believed were the stratagems of latter-day Robespierres like Joseph Chamberlain in whom they saw the specter of an antilandlord state. This was the mood in 1889 which prompted Lord Salisbury's Government to instruct its ambassador in Paris to absent himself from the centenary celebration of the French Revolution.

Such fears may be both overblown and yet not without grounds—as these in the event proved to be. From 1880 to 1914 aristocratic power was variously threatened: on its political side by the civil war in Ireland, humiliation in the Boer War, and crushing defeat in the 1906 General Election; and on its economic side by a fall in farm rents, the rise of progressive taxation, and the land policies of Lloyd George. For a ruling elite which had long had things its own way these challenges not surprisingly made for resentment and resistance. They also nurtured that "menacing sense of decadence" which pervaded the Edwardian mind and gave full play to the catastrophic imagination. Even that most imperturbable of men, the Conservative leader and philosopher, Arthur Balfour, chose as theme for the first Henry Sidgwick lecture in 1908 the fall of great societies, entitling it simply "Decadence."

Bedford's book gave this mood striking expression—and no doubt served to deepen it. Entitled *A Great Agricultural Estate* and published in 1897 the book had behind it the combined authority of the House of Russell's longstanding reputation as promoters of efficient agriculture and of the author's own budding reputation as a practical agriculturist. Bedford dealt with two of his estates, Woburn and Thorney, both agricultural estates comprising "some of the best wheat land in England." He set forth their financial history from 1816 to 1895 in detail. He showed that after a total expenditure of nearly four and one-quarter million pounds on the two estates since 1816 they were now in 1895 running a joint deficit of more than seven thousand pounds annually. Moreover, the return on capital investment in new works undertaken between 1875 and 1895 was a mere 2 1/7 percent for Thorney, and one percent for Woburn. In short, Bedford's story was one of ruin, of a great landed property descending into a forlorn condition of negative rent.

More than that, it was a ruin hastened by a vindictive state. Local government Bedford described as forever harassing him, forever haunting him "with a notice 'to abate some nuisance.'" As for the national government, he wrote bitterly: "I attribute much of the broken, bankrupt condition of landlords to the actions of our Imperial masters, who have worried land as though its very presence was a grievance." If he died, he noted, the new Harcourt death duties would levy a tribute of £25,000 on bankrupt Thorney alone. This was spoliation, the work of politicians who looked upon landowners as a parasitical class. Indeed, behind their legislative nostrums there loomed "the ominous prospect of confiscation." Faced by such perils Bedford exclaimed that men who did their duty by their dependents—and Bedford's outlay on his estates was indeed generous—and lost money by doing so, would get rid of their white elephants, thus ending financial loss and "the odium and anxieties attaching to the ownership of land."

Bedford's book drew national attention. The reviewers saw it for what it was: the great landowners' manifesto, a refutation of critics of the English estate system, a claim that the system "secured to those dwelling on the soil material and moral advantages greater than any that are promised under any alternative system, tried or untried." In many quarters it was hailed as "an instructive essay in applied economics," crammed with "authoritative detail" culled from "the systematically kept accounts of a liberally managed estate," and telling a story "the broad outlines of which many great English landlords will recognise as analogous to facts which have come within their own experience." One enthusiastic reviewer judged the book "a substantial contribution to the solution of the much-vexed land question."

Hostile reviewers were few. The most conspicuous was George Russell, who, as a Radical Liberal, a Henry Georgeite, and a kinsman (the younger son of a younger son), was disinclined to treat ducal writings with solemn respect—if in fact the duke had written the book which Russell hints he may not have. Russell dwelt on the book's silences. It said nothing about the 22,000-acre agricultural estate in the West Country centered on Tavistock. It also said nothing about that vast wealth-making but non-agricultural estate that occupied 119 acres in central London between the Strand and Euston Road. Russell would have it that such golden acres might well save Bedford from financial "despair" and go far to pay for the heavy outlay on his rural estates.

As Bedford's estate accounts reveal, Russell saw better than he knew how prosperous the duke in fact still was in 1895. His annual gross income was £264,257: £162,187 came from London; £39,684 came from Woburn; £25,511 came from Thorney; and £36,875 came from Tavistock. His gross income had increased, having been £234,856 in 1873 before the onset of agricultural depression. Tavistock, moreover, showed a comfortable surplus of something like £20,000. And Thorney showed no deficit, the purported one of £441 being in fact a small surplus of some £1,800, owing to the omission of a constituent property. However, the fall in farming rents from 1873 to 1895 was indeed alarming, although it varied on the several estates, Thorney being hardest hit at 45 percent, Woburn and Tavistock less so at 22 percent and 12 percent respectively. It was the growing London rental that more than compensated for the fall in farm rents.

In 1909 the story was much the same. Farming rents, if changed at all, were only slightly lower than in 1895. But London rent had continued to grow: the duke's gross annual income was now £319,369. Looked at from another point of view, that of indebtedness, mortgages (as in 1895) were conspicuous by their absence. In 1895 family charges had been light—chiefly two jointured dowagers, the more expensive one being on the brink of the grave. In 1909 family charges were still light—the major one appearing in 1910 when the duke's only son and only child came of age and by deed of resettlement cost his father £7,000 a year, rising to £15,000 in 1915. The young man, moreover, had simple tastes, preferring his natural history in the shape of spiders rather than horses, and, what was even more unusual for an Edwardian youth, he detested London society—rather like his mother who preferred a rough cottage in the Hebrides and abdicated all the formal duties of a Russell duchess.

Does it follow, then, from this survey of Bedford's wealth that the duke's discontents—as George Russell would have them—were trivial or even bogus? Before concluding this it is worth noting that Bedford was more than a very rich man: he was a special sort of rich man—a landed magnate, a paternalist, a countryman. London was the place from which he drew most of his money, but it was not the place that mattered. The fall of his farming rents exacerbated a painful awareness of a threatened way of life. Compared with the new plutocrats whose erupting fortunes were less complicated by paternal responsibilities, public duties, and a commitment to English rural life, Bedford felt himself vulnerable, even deprived. He would feel all the more so when government turned a critical eye on urban landownership.

Bedford's finances were not of course typical of great Edwardian landowners who if defined as owners of 10,000 English acres and more numbered 326. Only a minority of them enjoyed the windfall profits of urban ground rents and mineral royalties, and not all of these grew richer between 1873 and 1914. Coal allowed the Fitzwilliams and Lambtons to do so, and 477 acres in London's West End served the Grosvenors similarly. But sometimes even such estates did poorly. In spite of Sir Humphrey de Trafford's Manchester acres and the Marquis of Anglesey's mineral royalties, both bankrupted themselves after a career of personal extravagance. Bad luck and mismanagement brought less severe misfortune on the Cavendishes; for some years Barrow industrial and mineral enterprises swelled their gross income, tempting further investment, but then Barrow turned sour, leaving a debt large enough to alarm even that most unruffled of noblemen, the 8th duke of Devonshire.

But these examples, fortunate and unfortunate, tell us nothing of the majority of great English landowners who were largely, sometimes exclusively, owners of farming land. How did they fare? A half century ago Elie Halévy concluded in his classic work that they fended off the worst effects of agricultural depression and the Harcourt death duties by finding "new sources of wealth in the great joint-stock companies." This was mere guesswork on Halévy's part: he examined no estate accounts and his chief evidence seems to have been a ramshackle prosopography of the peers' wealth published by the London *Standard* in 1909. Still even the guesswork of an eminent historian may contain more than a grain of truth, as the following provisional sketch of the finances of great agricultural landowners would suggest.

As historians of England have learned since Halévy's day, not all agricultural estates faced a ruinous fall in rents. Much depended on soil and husbandry, and rents varied accordingly. We have already noted that Bedford did much better in the West Country than he did in East Anglia. The Honorable Mark Rolle's 55,000-acre estate in Devon also showed a relatively modest decline in rental. At Longleat in Wiltshire, the Marquis of Bath's farm rental in 1894-95 was only 11 percent below its 1878 level. On the other hand, the Yarboroughs in Lincolnshire suffered a sharper fall in rent: their peak rental of £78,500 in 1878 fell 27 percent by 1900. Despite this fall, however, the Yarboroughs' long-term policy of reducing their indebtedness was maintained, and interest payments on the family debt fell from £15,728 in 1870 to £11,870 in 1900.

The vast Coke estate in Norfolk did face a ruinous fall in rent, and here it is plain that Halévy's guesswork had its point. The Cokes' gross annual rental fell from a peak of £59,702 to a low of £31,393 in 1900, a fall of about 47 percent. This was largely offset, however, by the return from an equities portfolio slowly put together over the previous four decades. The second Lord Leicester began investing modestly in the 1840s and 50s, almost exclusively in local Norfolk enterprises. In the 1870s he much increased his investment and extended its range to include English and American railways, amounting in all to about £100,000. In the 1880s he increased his investment even more, roughly doubling it and extending the range again to government bonds, mortgage companies, and breweries. By 1894 the value of his portfolio was £500,000: he had done well in the stockmarket. Very much the countryman as he was, it is to be wondered if his success may be explained by his connection with nearby Sandringham, with the Prince of Wales and his retinue of shrewd financiers, those "cosmopolitan Jews" as the right-wing press was fond of describing them.

The history of great English landowners and the nineteenth-century stockmarket is still to be written: how large their stake was in it relative to the value of their landed property is unknown, although it would seem that by the 1880s the stake was growing markedly. A. J. Balfour was correct about the trend—although not about its magnitude—when in 1909 he observed that "the bulk of the great fortunes now are in a highly liquid state... they do not consist of huge 'landed estates, vast parks and castles, and all the rest of it." Even Bedford whose fortune was indeed great was relatively slow in acquiring an equities portfolio; not until 1910 was one established permanently which by 1914 accounted for about 16 percent of his gross annual income. A much diversified portfolio, it was roughly divided between railways and government bonds: British, American, Indian, and South American railways; Russian, Canadian, and South American bonds.

Stock market investment was not, of course, always profitable. Mistakes were made through fecklessness and bad luck. Arthur Balfour, for example, was a born plunger who lost a fortune in a scheme to exploit the caloric qualities of peat; and that Anglo-Irish squire, Moreton Frewen, sometimes known as Mortal Ruin, led a circle of aristocratic associates into one harebrained scheme after another. Gladstone, who was no plunger, nevertheless overspecialized in one undertaking in the 1860s, the Metropolitan District Railway Company, which got into trouble, costing him £50,000. Bedford was simply unlucky: on good advice he invested in 1914 about £100,000 in City of Moscow and City of Petrograd bonds. Finally, there were stockmarket slumps, as in the years from 1907 to 1914, when the best of portfolios could temporarily fall in value. On the whole, however, it is likely that the stock market provided a prop to the sagging finances of great agricultural landowners.

So did another market, one which Halévy and for that matter historians generally have overlooked. This was the art market which began to emerge in the 1880s in its modern hectic form. Here many great landowners had something to sell which was rapidly increasing in value. *The Estates Gazette*, a leading property journal, offhandedly described it as *bric-à-brac*—books, manuscripts, paintings, silver, furniture, tapestries, etc.—of which English country houses probably had the largest store in the world. Their owners had been great accumulators in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, gathering in the treasures of less prosperous societies, and they were in the way of becoming sellers by the 1880s, although only in part because their own fortunes were threatened. They also sold because of the temptingly high prices set before them by the new millionaires, especially the American, teased into a competitive frenzy by adroit merchants of culture like Berenson and Duveen. They sold, too, because their taste had changed; they were now largely philistine. Whatever moved them, landowners with *bric-à-brac* for sale might well find in this most recent of landed crops a magnificent windfall. Holbein's *Duchess of Milan*, for example, sold by the Duke of Norfolk, fetched £72,000 in 1909, a Holbein having sold in 1885 for £5,000. The art dealer, W. L. Agnew, observed in 1912: "Owners at the moment are staggered at the value of their pictures." A National Gallery list gives a rough impression of how much they had sold of their stock of pictures before 1914.

Books were sold as well as pictures, and the sale of the Althorp Library in 1892 furnishes an example of the revivifying effects of *bric-à-brac* for an estate almost wholly agricultural. As *The Times* described the library, it was "the finest private library in the world": it contained some 40-50,000 volumes gathered by that aristocratic *bibliomane*, the 2nd earl Spencer, in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. His descendant, the 5th earl, announced in June 1892 his intention to sell the library at public auction owing to falling agricultural prices—which as *The Times* put it "have made themselves severely felt by nearly all the great landowners of the country." Spencer's announcement caused dismay: a great library would be broken up, or if not broken up, sold abroad to a rich American. "What would a quarter of a million have been to an Astor or a Vanderbilt?," asked *The Times*. This fate was happily averted: Mrs. John Rylands of Manchester, wishing to commemorate her husband by founding a school and library for students of theology, offered £210,000 for the library *en bloc* and her offer was accepted. The story goes that if the earl and his agents had shown less alacrity the New York Public Library would have come forward with an offer of £300,000.

The Spencer fortune was nearly as much at risk as the Cokes'. Like them the Spencers had earlier in the century—largely through the sale of land—cleared the estate of a much larger debt than the Cokes'. Thereafter, unlike the Cokes, they began to recreate a debt, a modest one—by 1874 a mortgage debt of £54,000. At the same time, however, farm rents began to fall; between 1875 and 1895 they fell from £48,000 to £27,300, a fall of about 43 percent. Library proceeds went to paying off the debt and to fattening an equities portfolio started in the early 1870s. By 1898, with a rising farm rental, no interest payments, and an annual stocks dividend of £6,263, the Spencer income, although not completely restored, was now substantially so.

So far the insulation of great Edwardian estates from the full force of falling agricultural rents has been put at the door of *bric-à-brac*, equities, mining royalties, and urban rents. One further source of insulation—if a much more limited one—deserves mention. This was the very size of great English estates. Their ample acreage allowed for partial disinvestment in land, the return from which went to reducing or paying off mortgages and investing in the stock market, yet leaving enough land to warrant still being called a great estate. The pain of such disinvestment was softened by selling outlying properties or small parcels of land which had acquired nonagricultural value, by the declining political influence of land in the House of Commons (made very plain in the 1910 elections), by the growing belief that a creation of small owners would buttress great owners, and last but not least by the possibility of a small enhancement of net income. In *The Times* of 1911 the pseudonymous "Senex" made the case for selling land and improving income. He argued that sale would help pay off high-interest mortgages and by switching assets from high-upkeep land to stocks and bonds free of upkeep costs would provide a better return than sticky rents.

"Senex" would seem to be borne out by the accounts of the Grahams of Netherby, owners of a 26,000-acre agricultural estate in Cumberland. Unlike the Cokes or Spencers, who had cleared their estates of a large debt by 1850, the Grahams had gone on carrying a large debt, mainly built up between 1815 and 1835, which amounted to £275,000 in 1861 and remained unchanged until the early twentieth century. Unaffected by the agricultural depression until 1894, Netherby's gross rental fell to £20,000 in 1905, a fall of 25 percent from a peak of £26,718 in 1882. This fall was partly offset by new returns from an equities portfolio begun in the 1870s and by game rents which grew with the growing taste for the slaughter of wild and tame animals. Plans to sell part of the estate, first entertained in 1889, fell through for want of buyers. Then between 1910 and 1914 about half of the farmland was sold, the proceeds being applied to paying off 40 percent of the debt and investing the rest in the stock market. The Grahams' net income in 1914—net of tithe, taxes, and management costs—was roughly £16,000; in 1909 it had been roughly £14,000.

Bedford was also a seller of agricultural land and like the Grahams benefited from the sale. He began modestly in 1898, selling 2,000 acres in North Devon. He sold to his tenants, as he always preferred to do in his rural sales. In 1902 negotiations began for the entire Thorney estate, of which—although there were several offers from private persons and one from the Crown—nothing came until July 1909 when again the duke's tenants bought their farms, Bedford granting them mortgages at 4 percent up to two-thirds of the farm's purchase price. In the summer of 1911, with far greater dispatch, many of the West Country tenants also bought their farms on much the same terms. Altogether, including some smaller transactions, Bedford sold perhaps 30-35,000 acres, a scale of dislanding probably exceeded by no other seller at the time. He had lived up to his threats with a vengeance. And he had done well enough from the transaction, doing better as his tenants' mortgagee than as their landlord. Like the Grahams he had improved his net income but unlike them he was scarcely in need of such improvement.

Bedford also sold urban land: his Covent Garden estate in London. As an example of the complexity of economic decision-making this transaction deserves more attention than it will be given here. The Covent Garden estate was the jewel in Bedford's crown: nineteen acres, some seven hundred buildings, notably Covent Garden market, the Royal Opera House, the Drury Lane, Strand, and Aldwych theaters, the Waldorf Hotel, and the Bow Street Police Court. Unlike farm rentals, its returns drawn from market, ground, and buildings had grown markedly between 1885 and 1913. Yet it was sold in 1913 on a sagging local land market at an annual loss of income of £20,000. At about the same time that leviathan of London ground landlords, the 2nd duke of Westminster, on being approached by prospective buyers, curtly turned them away. How then is Bedford's sale to be explained?

The answer may lie partly in the influence of his close adviser, Rowland Prothero (later Lord Ernle). He had once been Bedford's tutor, and in 1898 became his chief estate agent, an appointment which in some quarters was found odd since his technical qualifications were not conspicuous. He had, however, in the 1880s become a leading Conservative spokesman on the deficiencies and dangers of Liberal land policy, assiduous in exciting landed anxiety. In 1912 he published his classic work, *English Farming*, in which he concluded that the worst of all possible worlds for English landowners had at last arrived. The language of the chapter, omitted in the fifth and sixth editions, is the language of disaster: "financially crippled" landowners reduced to "poverty" by "inequitable legislation" lay strewn, it would seem, over the English landscape. When a buyer for Covent Garden appeared the next year Ernle's advice was to sell; he feared confiscation without compensation.

This sketch of Edwardian landed finances has as yet gone no further than adducing general impressions and individual examples. Can anything be said quantitatively for the group as a whole? Halévy simply took it for granted that great Edwardian landowners were still well-to-do. If the measure of their condition is indebtedness, a variety of evidence is now available that speaks with more authority.

Official bankruptcy lists (1900-1914), for example, name eight landed bankrupts, 2.4 percent of the great landowners as a group. Most of them were in the lower range of great landed incomes, and some of them were in and out of financial troubles before 1900. What the lists reveal, of course, is the tip of the iceberg of landed indebtedness. That the body of the iceberg may not have been all that remarkable is strongly suggested by the annual Inland Revenue accounts (1904-1914), recently studied with care by Avner Offer. These were based on death duty returns which have permitted unique measurements of indebtedness: the amount of mortgage debt in the United Kingdom, its amount on different kinds of property, and its distribution on estates of various sizes, ranging from one hundred to one million pounds and more in net capital value. Offer has estimated that on all United Kingdom agricultural property—remembering that indebtedness would be highest here, all the more so as non-English properties were included—indebtedness was 27.8 percent of net capital value. For great agricultural estates, moreover, the estimate was roughly 23 percent for the smaller estates, falling to 5 percent for the largest. These orders of magnitude do not point to a formidable debt.

It was therefore reasonable for the *Quarterly Review* in 1903 to charge English landowners with a fondness for "professional pessimism." Their financial condition hardly warranted their cries of anguish. On the other hand, like Bedford, they found the future forbidding. Oddly enough, rich man that he was, Bedford found it so forbidding that he outdid most of them in the extent and nature of his landsales. It was as if—to adapt a phrase of Auden's—he was mauled by his own chimeras. He conjured up a specter of outright confiscation by an oppressive state, thereby allowing himself to be stampeded into selling much rural land as well as valuable London property which was sold at a loss.

Great landowners generally were not so readily stampeded. They too talked about confiscation, but they rarely meant it literally, as Bedford clearly had when he sold Covent Garden. Instead they talked loosely about being taxed "out of existence," to use the phrase of that Lincolnshire magnate, Christopher Turnor, who was not normally given to hyperbole. Landowners who sold were no doubt touched by this fear—although those who were touched by it did not always sell. The turnover of the land market from 1909 to 1914, rising though it was, hardly rose enough to warrant the growing use of a new and melodramatic phrase, "the breakup of the estate system." Perhaps some who were ready to sell failed to find buyers; more likely, perhaps, great landowners as a body were not yet prepared for so drastic a dénouement.

But another sort of dénouement—political rather than economic, a kind of gentlemen's revolution against the antilandlord state—was in the making. Percy Wyndham, a modest Wiltshire squire, George Wyndham's father, observed in 1908 that if landowners had "any future it can only be realized by fighting for [their] convictions and not by concessions." Some four decades earlier John Stuart Mill had noted with remarkable prescience that if political turbulence were to come in England it would come not from below but from above, not from the working classes but from the great owners of land: as he said, "the only question which may possibly become dangerous is that of the land." How this danger unfolded—how it gathered momentum as events moved on from the 1909 Budget to the Parliament Act and finally to the third Home Rule Bill—is the next topic of this lecture.

To treat briefly the growth of great landowners' political anger runs the risk of oversimplification. Landed beliefs and behavior are likely to appear too much of a piece, too much in the nature of a concerted plan. Perhaps a few prefatory remarks may help to lessen this impression. Not all great landowners were Tory, not all were even political; some were Liberal, and some were completely immersed in estate business and country life. Landed resolution took shape slowly, and the Parliament Act of 1911 was a major turning point. Thenceforward extremism more and more seized hold of the aristocratic mind. As in all organized resistance a small minority of leaders looked deeply into affairs most of the time, while a majority of followers looked much less deeply most of the time, content to be carried forward by the angry drift of unexamined opinion as it swirled through London clubs, regimental messes, and country-house parties.

If one event may be said to have set the scene for aristocratic resistance, it was the 1909 Budget. This raised the rate of death duties and income tax; it invented the supertax and above all the land taxes. Of these the death duty and the supertax, even though they bore more heavily than the land taxes, provoked less opposition among landowners. Since 1894 Conservative governments had themselves found death duties a useful tax. And the 1909 income tax favored agricultural incomes on the ground that the modest rate of landowners' return warranted it. In any case there was the emollient of tax avoidance: inter vivos gifts, discretionary trusts, in the case of death duties; foreign investments, foreign bank accounts, in the case of income and supertax. Tax avoidance as a means of landed survival in the twentieth century inevitably became more deliberate and ingenious as taxes became more varied and demanding.

Being modest in their incidence, why were the land taxes unacceptable to landowners? For one thing they were not readily intelligible. The mere names of the new values to be used in assessing the new taxes—"gross value," "total value," "full site value," "assessable site value," all of them in search of that ideal entity called pure rent—prompted landed dismay. For another thing, these new values and new taxes were to be accompanied by a new inquisitorial machinery, a vast scheme of land valuation, inevitably for landed minds the prelude to increased taxes if not worse. August 1910 found landowners confronted by the notorious Form 4, a detailed questionnaire, to be jointly filled in by owner and government valuer, the owner being expected, somewhat vaguely, to supply whatever information was at hand, including presumably his notions of his property's site value as of 30 April 1909. For still another thing, landowners were singled out as the sole object of the new taxes. These were exclusively *land* taxes—on unearned increment, on undeveloped land and minerals. Landowners had always known that they deserved special treatment—but favored not disfavored treatment. To find it otherwise brought sharp alarm, especially in windfall profit sectors like urban groundrents where great owners, accustomed to great wealth and political power, were conspicuous.

Worst of all, perhaps, there was Lloyd George himself: his demagogy, his hatred of aristocracy. Few men had his gift for invective; who else could have dismissed the great landowning peers as "those five hundred men, ordinary men chosen accidentally from among the unemployed." He was, moreover, as unscrupulous and inventive as he was eloquent. The Tories were right to complain that his scheme for land valuation had no place in a Budget: "the Budget *qua* Budget stank," as a leading historian of twentieth-century Liberalism has bluntly put it. No wonder that in many landed minds the machinery for land valuation was simply the machinery for land nationalization—although in all likelihood Lloyd George's intentions were less clear in his own than in landed minds. Most distressing was the authority that lay behind his words. Lloyd George's program, unlike Joseph Chamberlain's in the 1880s, was an authorized not an unauthorized program. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer: he spoke for the party in power. In short, the antilandlord state, so long feared, had come to being.

One form of resistance to it was private, resorted to on some estates—how many I do not know—in order to blunt and frustrate the working of the valuation machinery and the collection of the new taxes. The great Bedford London estate provides an example. Here the Bedford agents took care not to supply the government valuer with what they described as "dangerous information," that is, information useful in estimating site value, leaving the valuer to make this out for himself as best he could, while the Bedford agents and government valuers indulged in an elaborate negotiation over each of the 1,664 units of occupation on the estate. This strategy worked well: the valuers, many of them new to the trade, were very impressionable—in one agent's words, "very much at sea in the fulfillment of their duties." The Bedford tax assessments proved better than had been expected.

Another form of resistance was the pressure group. In April 1910 Ernest George Pretyman founded the Land Union. He was a many-acred Suffolk and Lincolnshire landowner, an ex-army officer, whose maiden speech in the House of Commons had protested the Harcourt death duties. Fifteen years later, in the Budget debates of 1909, he came forward as a latter-day George Bentinck, mastering the details of a vast and complicated Budget as Bentinck had mastered the details of Corn Law finance. When the Budget and its land taxes became law, he designed the Land Union "to combine all interested in land industry for their own defence," from solicitors, surveyors, and builders to landowners, farmers, and mortgagees. His object was the repeal of the land taxes. This did not come until 1920, but even before then—by March 1914—the Land Union had managed to impede the working of the valuation machinery and the collection of the land taxes by successfully challenging the Liberal Government in the courts. Although Pretyman had thought of the Land Union as an organization of small owners, it also recruited the great, like Bedford, Westminster, and Portman.

The main form of resistance was, of course, the Tory party formidably entrenched in the House of Lords. It threw down the gauntlet on 30 November 1909, when it rejected the Budget by an unusually large vote, 350 to 75. That hammering of the "land system" and the great dukes, in Lloyd George's Limehouse speech of 30 July, probably sealed the Budget's fate. The Lords' rejection came after a discussion of only six days—the Commons having given the Budget the longest hearing of any Budget in English history. About 60 percent of great landed peers took the Tory side, about 4 percent the Liberal.

It has been said that "the brains of resistance" in 1909 was the Tariff Reform element in the Tory party, the followers of Joseph Chamberlain. In some sense this may be true, but it overlooks the crucial role of great landowners like Lansdowne, Arthur Balfour, and Balfour's Cecil relations who were neither Tariff Reformers nor lacking in brains. They had long been equipped with what has been called the "referendal theory"—itself an invention of the great Marquis of Salisbury. This asserted that the House of Lords had the duty of referring legislation to the electorate if that legislation in the Lords' opinion had not received unmistakable popular approval. Successfully applied by the Lords before 1909, it was now brought into play again. As Balfour put it in November 1909, "The House of Lords can on a great occasion invoke the judgment of the country upon revolutionary proposals made in the Lower House." Contrary to what has often been said, Balfour's choosing to use the House of Lords in this way was neither inappropriate nor unwise: the Budget was odd, by Tory standards revolutionary; the Lords' action, if unusual, was legal; and Balfour, master of parliamentary tactics, judged rejection a winning electoral card. In both elections of 1910 it almost won, the Tories actually gaining slightly more votes (if fewer seats) than the Government.

Still the gamble was lost; and, even worse, its loss paved the way for a much greater humiliation, the Parliament Act of August 1911. The narrow defeats of the 1910 elections had given the Irish Nationalists in the Commons the balance of power, and they had put a high price on their support of the Liberal government: abolition of the Lords' veto power and Irish Home Rule. Ending the Lords' veto struck at landed society's political power as the 1909 Budget had struck at its economic power. The Lords themselves had contemplated some reform of their House in 1910, but not even the wildest among the reforming peers took satisfaction either in the Parliament Bill, or, what was even more repugnant, the mode of its enactment. How to meet it split the Tory party and landed society: a majority led by Balfour and Lansdowne was for yielding; a minority, among them some of the great landowners like Bedford, Salisbury, and Westminster, later calling itself the Halsbury Club (after an ancient and choleric judge), was for fighting to the last ditch. But this split over tactics, however distressing at the moment, proved but temporary.

However they differed on tactics, they shared a general sense of outrage. The cry now was the Constitution in danger, as the Tory party took to itself the additional name of Constitutional party. The same bitter protest issued from all quarters of landed society to the effect that in destroying the Lords' veto (its claim to a significant measure of authority) the Constitution had been destroyed. Grey of Howick, in his younger days a Whig, now a Liberal Unionist of sorts and governor-general of Canada, declared: "I come back to this country after seven years of absence to find the Constitution overthrown and Jack Cade securely established on the throne." Selborne, a leader of the Halsbury Club, put it another way: "There is no more a House of Commons than a House of Lords. There is nothing but the Cabinet, subject to the continuous but slight check of the Crown and the violent but occasional check of the electors." Even A. J. Balfour, chief object of the Halsbury Club's anger, acknowledged that the Parliament Act was a revolutionary stroke: "We are," he wrote, "the victims of a revolution." They summed it up as the coming of "single chamber tyranny," forerunner of miscellaneous evils yet to come: attacks on the Church, on landed and financial capital, on the Empire (Irish Home Rule being notable among the last).

In their resistance some landowners took the long view, looking to constitutional reconstruction: to a reform of the House of Lords that would strengthen rather than weaken it; and some to a far-ranging federal system of imperial government as well. But most landowners took the short view, to ridding the country somehow of its Liberal Government, that "Revolutionary Committee" as Bonar Law was fond of calling it. If the Parliament Act made such resistance imperative, it also offered the means to bring it about—fighting Irish Home Rule to the bitter end.

This meant actively encouraging Ulster Protestantism. Such would be the last chapter in the story of landed resistance, what one sympathizer called "the Armageddon of Home Rule."

Deploying Ulster Protestantism to frustrate Home Rule and the Liberal party was not a new idea. Lord Randolph Churchill in the 1880s was its inventor, but he only played with it. The Tory party in 1893 took it up more seriously. A mixed company of great English and Irish landowners and leading Unionist politicians met in fraternal harmony with a great delegation of Irish loyalists in the grounds of Hatfield House. Suitably rousing speeches were made—one by Salisbury denouncing this "detestable document" (the second Home Rule bill), another by Balfour vowing eternal allegiance to the United Kingdom. But nothing more came of this than speeches and demonstrations, even these striking the Duke of Devonshire as excessive, a regrettable necessity given the nature of the times. Little did the duke imagine what Ulster and English Unionists would between them concoct two decades later; not merely speeches and demonstrations but the makings of a civil war: on the one hand, an armed force in Ulster pledged to resist the third Home Rule bill by any means; on the other hand, the Tory party pledged to support this resistance by any means. Hence John Ramsden's stern summing-up in his quasi-official and refreshingly candid history of the Edwardian Conservative party: "the patriotic party became begetters of rebellion, the party of order suborned crime and mutiny, and the leader of the opposition approved and supported the destruction of both the practice and authority of parliament."

It was Lord Hugh Cecil, younger son of the Marquis of Salisbury and stormy petrel of the Tory party, who even before the Parliament Act was among the first to anticipate and help set on foot this Ulster-led extremism. Writing of Lord Hugh, a junior Tory whip made the following entry in his parliamentary journal: "He loves the idea of a Constitutional row, he always did, even at Oxford. He says our weak point is not to have had a clearly thought out plan of campaign all through, as the Radicals have had. He is very anxious to get up a violent agitation in Ulster in the autumn and have a secession of the Northern Counties worked out in every detail. He thinks someone of the position of Milner or Selborne ought to go over to run the secession." Cecil was as good as his word. Sometime in July 1911 he conveyed his plan for Ulster to James Craig, Ulster leader, Member of Parliament, ex-stockbroker and army captain in the Boer War who had devised a similar plan—except that he had already decided who was to lead the Ulster secession. It was to be Edward Carson, a successful barrister at the English Bar but by origin a southern Irishman, a Protestant, fanatically dedicated to the Union of Ireland and England who had made his way to the top of the Tory party. What Carson himself had in mind he made very plain—which was his habit—in a letter to George Curzon in August 1911: "unless dramatic action is taken," he wrote, "to the extent of damaging the parliamentary machine we cannot under existing circumstances get any fair play."

By October 1913 the official Tory word was that Ulster must become the chief party business. As Alfred Milner put it: "Shout Ulster, Ulster all the time, and no running after Lloyd George." This final closing of party ranks owed something to Lloyd George's Land Campaign, also launched in October, which struck the note of a public crusade, a national regeneration. England in town and country was to be transformed by coming to grips with "landlordism...the greatest of all monopolies," which cast its dark shadow over every English home rural and urban. Lloyd George promised a quick and easy remedy: a Ministry of Land empowered to regulate the major transactions of landed business, from rents and wages to registration and valuation. This oddly bucolic vision, seeking to regenerate the city by regenerating the countryside, threatened—or so it seemed to the Tory and landed mind—to sweep everything before it.

That the Ulster question became in effect the landed reply to Lloyd George and the Liberal Government is understandable. A great landowner, the Duke of Portland, normally bored by the political game, hailed Ulster as "a real living issue enlisting the duty of every man to see it through." It stirred deep emotional depths. In the nation at large there was still a lively English Protestant dislike of Irish Catholicism. In English landed society, moreover, the idea of Irish independence did violence to a genuine sense of propinquity and loyalty. Great English landowners often had close ties with Irish landowners—ties of family, religion, sport—and many of them owned Irish estates. Lansdowne, Tory leader in the Lords, had once owned over 100,000 acres of Irish land, about ten times the size of his home estate in Wiltshire, and although he sold much of it in the 1890s his Irish roots remained strong. Even without Irish land, however, a great English landowner was likely to recoil from Home Rule as if from some sort of betrayal of his Irish brethren—all the more so, perhaps, given the latter's plight, sunk in their "congenital schizophrenia," at once agreeably dislanded by the Wyndham Act and suffering the pangs of the uprooted and abandoned.

The Ulster question also had a strong, if less obvious, ideological footing. Tory ideology had assumed new dimensions in the Edwardian era, one imperialist, the other democratic. That greatest of great landowners, the 2nd duke of Westminster, wrote in 1912 that they were one and the same thing: "Imperialism is merely the latest, and I think the highest, incarnation of our democratic nationalism." The duke's imperialism, like that of Edwardian conservatism generally, was strident. He summed it up as "practical" compared to the "arm chair" imperialism of the Liberals: it was founded on a design for a British world state. For Westminster it was either this or nothing: "We must either unify the Empire or allow it to disintegrate. By unifying it... it will continue to be the greatest state in the world." This was Milnerism, to which the duke had become fervently attached during a brief spell in South Africa under the man whom he continued to regard as his revered chief. It was a new dream of glory, attractive to great landowners perhaps in compensation for the fading of older dreams. Some had already sought to acquire land in various parts of the Empire: Westminster had purchased 19,000 acres in the Orange Free State; Bedford had even thought he might plant the English estate system in the Canadian prairies. Not much, however, came of transporting landed society. But maintaining imperial power was another thing—and Irish autonomy would only diminish it, and at a point much too close to home for comfort.

Westminster did not spell out what he meant by democracy. Perhaps it was beyond him, inasmuch as the Tory landed mind, long nourished on a Burkeian dislike of democracy, was only taking up this unaristocratic creed. It was doing so grudgingly, in a sense backing into it, thus creating a new sort of democracy, at any rate something different from the Liberal sort. Whereas the Liberal sort might be said to be orderly and representative, the Tory sort might be said to be turbulent and participatory. This idea of democracy informed Selborne's charge (quoted earlier) that the Liberal Government was at bottom a Cabinet dictatorship. It was what Salisbury had in mind as he taunted John Morley for "his old Toryism," with still living "in the days of Burke," when Members of Parliament took their own line and deferential voters bowed to superior judgment. But those days were over. "What we poor miserable Conservatives want to do," said the marquis, "is really ascertain what the wishes of the people are."

This was the banner flown by many great English landowners as they entered the age of democracy. Whatever else it was, it was far from being a white flag of surrender; indeed great landowners were in some ways more active politically than ever before. Walter Long, for example, was nothing if not skilled at organizing and managing pressure groups like the Union Defence League, the Budget Protest League, the Central Landowners' Association, to name some—not the sort of exercise hitherto characteristic of country gentlemen. Equally uncharacteristic was the work of the 1911 Unionist Organization Committee, half of whose membership was landed. It undertook a major overhaul of the party organization, the better to harness the network of new pressure groups and thus coordinate a massive full-time effort at the political education of mass democracy. Hence the insistence on the Referendum which at one and the same time would join a reformed and strong House of Lords (still paying respect to hereditary landowners) and a systematic appeal to democratic opinion on major questions. In the place of the remorseless operation of the Parliament Act, which would turn the Home Rule bill into law in 1914, the Tory opposition in the name of democracy demanded that Home Rule be put to a Referendum before it became law.

Finally, the Irish question offered distinct party advantage. For one thing, it could unite a party that had suffered serious division over Tariff Reform, the House of Lords, rural reconstruction. For another thing, it attacked the Liberal Government on its most exposed flank.

Much too slowly, as Patricia Jalland has recently pointed out, did it dawn on the Liberal leadership that an Ulster threatened by Home Rule would yield only to force, and that the Army, landed society's sole claim to a profession, might balk at being so used. Something like this happened at the Curragh in March 1914 when officers managed to extort from Government a promise that they would not be asked to serve against Ulster. Although this extraordinary concession was quickly withdrawn, the Government's impotence had been demonstrated: without the Army's support Irish Home Rule was dead. The Liberal Government was not unseated but as all the world could see it was brought to a standstill, fearful of moving forward lest by doing so the Army break in its hands.

A climatic episode, closely connected with the Curragh incident, warrants brief notice here, partly because it has had insufficient attention, partly because it discloses something of the role of great English landowners as political extremists. On the morning of 3 March 1914, the British Covenant appeared in every leading British newspaper, bearing the signatures of twenty eminent Englishmen and announcing that if the Home Rule Bill were passed without previous recourse to a General Election — that is, without a Referendum — they would hold themselves justified "in taking or supporting any action that may be effective to prevent it being put into operation and more particularly to prevent the armed forces of the Crown being used to deprive the people of Ulster of their rights as citizens of the United Kingdom." Among the original twenty signers of the Covenant there were four landowning peers, Desborough, Halifax, Lovat, and Portland; more had been available but the framers of the Covenant (chiefly Milner and Leo Amery) found it unwise to bring forward too many titled personages. Among the six hundred signatures selectively published during March 1914, some eighty were landowners, including Sutherland, Lonsdale, Bath, Barnard, Harewood, and Manvers, representing hundreds of thousands of English acres. Others, like Westminster, Salisbury, Devonshire, Bedford, de Broke, Walter Long, Londonderry, and Norfolk, although often more deeply involved, did not sign; perhaps like Lansdowne they found it prudent or seemly not to. What is least clear about these aristocratic Covenanters is the extent of their financial contribution. Large sums were raised in England for the defense of Ulster and for the promotion of the British Covenant, a principal moneyraiser being Walter Long. About all that is known so far is a list of likely contributors drawn up by him in February 1914. Heading the list was Waldorf Astor, the squire of Cliveden, pledged to give £30,000; further down the list were Bedford and Rothschild pledged to give £10,000. It is not likely that this was a definitive list; financial contributions to Ulster might well have been made through other organizations, like the Union Defence League, also managed by Walter Long.

Quietly approved by the Tory leaders, the League of British Covenanters got its start by joining forces with Willoughby de Broke's British League for the Support of Ulster and the Union, founded a year earlier and similarly approved. Their story still remains to be told in detail. In brief, each pursued its course right up to the declaration of war against Germany. De Broke's League, on 3 July 1914, in its encampment at Harrow, staged a march past with fixed bayonets before the League's notables, the Duke of Bedford being Honorary President; and the Covenanters' executive foregathered in London as late as 30 July, Desborough coming up for the meeting from Panshanger. Even with the start of a world war, landed anger remained at the boiling point. The Covenanters formally disbanded on 7 August, but Asquith's compromise but designedly temporary settlement of the Irish question in mid-September—a reasonable enough compromise—prompted a final outburst. In the Commons, Bonar Law delivered "possibly the most bitter speech" of his career, climaxed by the mass exodus of his party from the House. In the Conservative "Shadow Cabinet," a majority, mostly landed, favored manipulating a technical flaw in the Parliament Act to block the Liberal compromise, and only drew back when their leaders—no less distressed than themselves—judged the tactic unwise. "So we ran away," wrote Selborne bitterly, "and the government trampled on us." In fact, something like the very opposite had been the case. Ulster, the Tory party, and great landowners and their allies had seen to that.

Some general points need making in conclusion. In his biography of John Dillon, Professor Lyons has written: "The obstinate, and in the end successful resistance of Ulster and English Unionists to the extremely moderate self-government which Parnell, Redmond and Dillon were originally prepared to accept will always remain one of the strangest mysteries of politics." Admittedly the third Home Rule Bill was about the most anemic measure of its sort that the wit of man might devise, and taken by itself it is hard to see why it was so fiercely resisted. On the other hand the Tory landed mind saw Home Rule not in isolation but closely connected with the 1909 Budget, the Parliament Act, the Land Campaign, and other mischief yet to come. In this context resistance to Home Rule becomes less mysterious, less irrational, than it is sometimes portrayed. After all, as Tocqueville put it, "nothing in the world has so absolute a fixity of purpose as an aristocracy"—from which it followed that "an aristocracy seldom yields without a protracted struggle."

Inveterate Anglophile that he was, Tocqueville also hoped that the English aristocracy would prove an exception to the rule. In his *Democracy in America* he saluted them as perhaps the most liberal in the history of the world. He died in 1859, to the end always thinking that there was a chance that they might remain so, that they might usher in the reign of democracy, teach democracy the virtues of aristocracy, and then slip quietly away. There has been a tendency to believe that something like this happened, and to congratulate the English aristocracy on their capacity for gracious self-effacement. But the political career of many great English landowners in the Edwardian era does not bear this out, unless it is argued, as Lord Blake seems once to have argued, that the defense of Ulster was essentially the posture of an embattled liberalism, a sort of throwback to 1641. I doubt the analogy is a good one. In any case, the concern for the Ulster Protestants was on balance not much more than a secondary concern, a means to obtain a greater object. Admittedly some Tories might have been content with some form of Ulster settlement, but not the British Covenanters and their landed contingent, who sought by any means to defeat the real enemy, Irish Home Rule and the Liberal Government. In short, it is hard to escape the conclusion that Edwardian politics seriously marred the liberal reputation of England's aristocracy.

The last point is more speculative: it has to do with the chronology of landed decline. Something of a distinction should probably be made between the gentry and the great landowners; landed decline affected the former more than the latter. The great landowners had larger acreages, larger financial reserves, larger influence and ambitions; they were thus less vulnerable to an erosion of landed society gathering force since 1870, less ready to give up the ghost. If decline is part of the story of great Edwardian landowners, so too is resistance and consolidation. Some reduced the size of their estates in the upsurge of Edwardian land sales, but on the whole not dramatically. Some undertook the building of a buffer state of small owners by selling land to tenants, but not on any great scale. Some rearranged their financial assets, putting their eggs in more than one basket, selling off some of their *bric-à-brac*, but again not in a wholesale fashion. In politics the great landowners lost their landed followers in the House of Commons and much of their power as a House of Lords, but they remained strong in the leadership of a Tory party now refashioned to pay less attention to Parliament and more to the education of a mass electorate. Moreover, without themselves becoming junior or sleeping partners, they took their once-junior partners—lawyers, editors, civil servants, admirals, generals, and the merely wealthy—more fully into the firm. In Raymond Asquith's cruel witticism, these were the "clever cads" whom the management of an empire had made increasingly important to the landed aristocracy, those "few stuffy families with ugly faces and bad manners and a belief in the Nicene Creed." In all this it is plain that the aristocracy's appetite for political leadership—in other words, their will to govern—had not vanished. Although both their influence in the locality and at the center had diminished, they still kept their hands on the levers of political power. One important thing, however, they could not provide for. This was the war of 1914-1918, perhaps the twentieth-century's most senseless tragedy, which they welcomed and for which they paid a bitter price. Possibly here, and not earlier, was the English aristocracy's sense of purpose for the first time seriously shaken.
