If only by virtue of his thirteen years' residence in England, Eduard Bernstein was a keen observer of Anglo-German relations. His expertise in the field was publicly acknowledged within and outside the party, on one occasion by no less a person than August Bebel.<sup>2</sup> Yet few historians have devoted serious attention to Bernstein's preoccupation with the Anglo-German problem, possibly because Bernstein's analysis ultimately had very little appreciable impact within party circles.<sup>3</sup> Although it is widely recognized now as previously that Bernstein was an incorrigible anglophile,<sup>4</sup> Bernstein is generally related to England chiefly in the context of the extent to which his Revisionism was indebted to Fabian influence.<sup>5</sup> This omission is regrettable, and not merely because his views on the problem of Anglo-German relations were remarkably perceptive, even prophetic, for one who was, after all, a political outsider. In his autobiographical *Entwicklungsgang eines Sozialisten* Bernstein subsequently acknowledged that one of his two chosen areas of specialization as a Reichstag deputy between 1902 and 1912 was foreign affairs.<sup>6</sup> Since, at that time, there was no issue of more crucial importance to German foreign policy, or to international relations generally, than the Anglo-German problem, and particularly since Bernstein himself considered that his views in this field were "more or less orthodox" (*sozusagen parteiorthodox*),<sup>7</sup> an exposition of Bernstein's views on this subject appears not only long over-due — this paper portends to offer no more than that — but may shed further light on the character of Bernstein's Revisionism.

For Social Democrats, as for Germans generally during the *Kaiserreich*, attitudes towards England constituted a yard-stick of their position on the progressive-reactionary continuum. To be pro-English was to be at the same time progressive, free-trade, internationalist and pacifist, or at least to favour a programme of moderate, gradual and peaceful expansion within the existing framework of international relations. To be anti-English, on the other hand, was to be protectionist, nationalistic and in favour of vigorous and unilateral German expansionism. In Germany it had long been fashionable for liberals and progressives to be pro-English. After Bismarck, who nationalized German liberalism into a grotesque it was was only the Social Democrats, following the lead of Marx, together with a handful or left liberal voices in the wilderness, who continuned to look to England as the model bourgeois state. For pre-war Social Democracy as a whole the ideal of an "accommodation with England was increasingly the ultima ratio of German foreign policy; the ideological, political and, not least, the economic advantages of such an alliance made an antithetical policy appear almost insane." Bernstein remained true to his English background and to Social Democratic tradition, a preference which drew him closer in spirit to the party centre at a time when both left and right-wing factions within the party began moving in new directions. After the Boer War, the Vietnam experience of liberal England, and still more after the Russian revolution of 1905, the left in Germany sought models no longer in imperialist Britain but looked instead to the revolutionary possibilities of the political strike and workers councils as pioneered by the Russian revolution and earlier by the Paris commune. Simultaneously the party right began to tread in the footsteps of the German liberals, setting their cap at national greatness and imperial grandeur as they became conscious of their integration into the German nation and their impending conquest of the German state. In the long term, attitudes towards England were therefore a far more accurate barometer of a pre-war German socialist's true political position than were his thoughts, if any, on such theoretical conundrums as the theory of value or the prognosis of capitalist callapse. It would appear that in this sense, too, Bernstein was a "cas d'espèce" and a "cas-type."<sup>10</sup>

Bernstein's analysis of the Anglo-German problem can be considered in terms of his examination of the origin of the Anglo-German quarrel, his view of the legend of the "English peril" and the Entente encirclement of Germany, his efforts to refute the arguments of the anglophobes and the fatalists, his location of the ultimate source of Anglo-German friction in the ideological peculiarities of the two nations and his proselytizing on behalf of Anglo-German amity. His observations on these subjects show that this prominent Revisionist and notorious anglophile maintained a close and informed interest in the question of Anglo-German relations, which he regarded as "a major issue of German politics''<sup>11</sup> and which he analysed systematically and reported on in depth. Bernstein's position on this issue can be seen to have been related to his Revisionism in that a saner *Englandpolitik* would, he hoped, ease the path to democratic socialism in the Reich, and insofar as this attitude clearly divorced him from people like Joseph Bloch, the true ''impresario of Revisionism.''<sup>12</sup> Bernstein's analysis of the Anglo-German problem further suggests that the latent community of interest and outlook with his ostensible enemies among the centre-orthodoxy was far greater than either would have believed possible at the time.

In explaining the origins of the Anglo-German conflict Bernstein was careful to point out that relations between Germany and Britain had traditionally been amicable and that the antagonism of the Wilhelmine era was therefore a novelty which in no way reflected historical or natural conflicts of interest.<sup>13</sup> Indeed he traced the origins of this antagonism to Bismarck's abandonment of free trade in 1879.<sup>14</sup> He believed that the swing to protectionism had been carried out on behalf of the agrarian Junker interest and at the instigation of misguided economic theorists as well as certain business groups.

Bernstein condemned protectionism as a disastrous policy for Germany, not only because it ran counter to the true interests of the German economy as a whole and imposed severe burdens on the working class and on consumers generally, but more particularly because it introduced an element of serious friction in Anglo-German relations.<sup>15</sup> In order to defend her commerce against the subsequent tide of European and North American protectionism, Britain began to take a keener interest in her empire, so that when Bismarck, too, climbed onto the colonial bandwagon in 1884-85, Germany now became entangled also in colonial clashes with Britain.<sup>16</sup> By 1897 friction had become endemic as Germany commenced construction of a vast battleship navy. Overlying these points of irritation were the unbridled and unwarranted anti-British fulminations of an ''ignorant and irresponsible'' German press and the abrasive style of German diplomacy, which on numerous occasions manifested an apparent determination to aggravate rather than eliminate those sources of friction already called into being by German policy. German creation which was as artificial and avoidable as it was ill-conceived, for it was "in no way rooted in the vital interests of the German people.

An especially dangerous element which had crept into Anglo-German relations was, in Bernstein's view, the myth of the "English peril" and the related legend of the "encirclement policy" of the Entente. Many years before the outbreak of war in 1914 it was widely, almost universally believed in Germany that Britain was irreconcilably hostile towards Germany because of envy of German commercial success on the world market and out of resentment of German colonial ambitions. For this reason, it was supposed, Britain had formed an alliance with France in 1904 and then aligned herself with Russia in 1907, thereby encircling Germany diplomatically and militarily. Since the British were striving not for piecemeal advantage but rather to preserve their faltering *arbitrium mundi* against the challenge represented by the bustling, burgeoning German superpower, their aim was not merely to check German economic, colonial or naval expansion but to destroy the foundations of German's Great Power position. Such a struggle could end only in the elimination of one of the two contending powers. Whether desirable or not, armed conflict between Britain and Germany was ultimately inevitable because sooner or later Britain would seek out and discover a pretext for a war to the death against her putative rival.

This legend was soon having the effect of poisoning the minds of the German people against Britain, giving rise to a wave of "stupid anglophobia" and promoting widespread popular acceptance of the doctrine that armed conflict with Britain could not be averted. Anglophobia was being disseminated in the press by spokesmen of the armaments industry, by ambitious politicians, sensationalist writers, nationalist fanatics and protectionist monomaniacs. Acting from a variety of motives including perverse economic thinking, national arrogance and plain vested interest, these publicists were systematically inflaming the reading public against Britain through their boundless ignorance and irresponsibility. Bernstein claimed to have seen in no British journal of any significance such gratuitously offensive insults to Germany as those offered to Britain time and again in the pages of almost every major German publication. Whereas "only in quite isolated instances does one encounter examples of real germanophobia" in Britain,  anglophobia had become *de rigueur* in Germany:

> In England and in the British Colonies a very great contempt for the Germans was frequently exhibited (before 1914) but very little trace of germanophobia was to be found. In Germany, on the other hand, certain circles have systematically laboured to this end, and have cultivated a genuine hate of England in the people.<sup>26</sup>

These "certain circles" were deliberately presenting Britain in an entirely inaccurate light<sup>27</sup> through their "campaign of lies which has so greatly contributed towards releasing an orgy of national hate unexampled in the history of nations,"<sup>28</sup> bringing matters to such a pass that German patriotism had become synonymous with hatred of Britain.<sup>29</sup> By the second Moroccan crisis the anglophobes had captured the whole of the bourgeois press, even that of the left liberals or *Freisinnige*,<sup>30</sup> so that August Bebel professed to have witnessed nothing comparable in intensity in all his long experience of public life: "neither against Austria (in 1866) nor against France (in 1870) had there ever existed such general hostility."<sup>31</sup> Apart from the Social Democratic workforce there was nothing in Germany to call a halt to the wave of anglophobia then sweeping through German public opinion. Bernstein maintained that the anti-British smear campaign was only partly a product of wrong-headed thinking. In 1903 he told the Reichstag: "The whole hubbub that has been going on here has no other foundation than to create bad blood against England and at the same time to provoke bad blood in England."

Bernstein noted with regret that this sentiment was not confined to bourgeois opinion but was all too prevalent among his party comrades, and not least among his fellow Revisionists.<sup>33</sup> Joseph Bloch, for instance, loathed the English, whom he damned as a nation of hypocritical philistines, their sole contribution to civilization being the bath-tub.<sup>34</sup> More to the point, he insisted that *Englandpolitik* and tariff policy were part and parcel of the whole complex of issues determining Germany's world standing.<sup>35</sup> Of the various Revisionist writers who gave public expression to this viewpoint none was more explicit than Karl Leuthner, an Austrian Social Democrat who wrote regularly for the *Sozialistische Monatshefte* on foreign policy questions and was one of Bloch's favourite contributors.<sup>36</sup> But the left, too, produced its quota of anglophobic utterances. At Chemnitz in 1912 Georg Ledebour described the Anglo-German conflict as a contest between "the fat rats" and "the hungry rats," pouring scorn on British proposals for arms limitation and Anglo-German understanding as a cynical capitalist ploy to freeze economic and commercial relations at their existing level, thereby perpetuating British supremacy on the world market.<sup>37</sup> This viewpoint was also defended by Paul Lensch and Anton Pannekoek.<sup>38</sup> In fact, the radical left as a whole was possibly more susceptible to anti-English feeling than any other faction.<sup>39</sup> Like all Germans of the Wilhelmine period, its members were exposed to the pressures of patriotism, ignorance and the anti-English agitation in the bourgeois press. Over and above this, they were virtually obliged by Marxist doctrine, as then interpreted, to be anti-English, if not anglophobic. In Marxist terms the Anglo-German quarrel was essentially a struggle between competing capitalisms under conditions of uneven development. British capitalists, being first in the field, naturally strove to preserve their early leadership by blocking their German and other rivals. In thus seeking to arrest the march of history, British capitalism was playing a reactionary role whereas German capitalism functioned as an agent of progress. As such, German capitalism had the stronger claim on socialist sympathy and support.

It was symptomatic of the whole situation that while Edward Pease could write in a German Social Democratic journal to assure Germans that no-one in Britain was giving serious thought to the notion of war with Germany Albert Südekum shortly afterwards addressed members of the Fabian Society in London in a different vein. Südekum stressed that in addition to the socialists, "the Liberals, the Radicals, the Catholic Party, and even a part of the Conservatives are opposed to any idea of a war between England and Germany. He nevertheless went on to warn that the whole of the German people was drifting into a "sullen, fatalistic acquiescence in the 'inevitable.' By 1912 this temper had taken possession of the entire bourgeoisie, and Südekum could confide in the pages of his diary: "Not at all infrequently one hears desperate businessmen expressing the ill-considered saying, 'Rather an end to terror than terror without end.'

Those who believed in the inevitability of war with Britain not only overlapped with but in fact outnumbered those who were persuaded of its desirability. Bernstein felt that not all the anti-British agitators acted out of self-interest or nationalist arrogance: their ranks included many, like Südekum's "desperate businessmen," who had allowed themselves to be convinced that the interests of Britain and Germany were diametrically opposed and that these differences could not be resolved peacefully. Even some "unscrupulous agitators" fanned the flames of "hate and distrust of other nations without directly aiming at war." Writing after the event, Bernstein estimated those of the war party as comprising no more than ten percent of the adult population. The remainder he divided between those who were either opposed to war or "passive towards the conflict between the war party and the peace party." At times Bernstein himself evidently found a degree of plausibility in the inevitability thesis, as when he divested himself of the Micawberism: "It may be possible to postpone war between England and Germany until circumstances have arisen which make it impossible."

This fatalism also engulfed the German labour movement as a whole, and not merely the ill-informed or the willing believers. August Bebel, for one, was convinced that "we are on the eve of the most terrible war that Europe has ever seen," adding that "even if we (socialists) had a majority in the Reichstag we could not prevent a war against England." In the period 1910 to 1913 Bebel repeated this warning several times in his conversations with Sir Henry Angst, British consul-general in Zürich, making it abundantly clear that he expected the dreaded conflict to be an aggressive war launched by the Prussian Junkers, who would never be weaned from their age-old tradition of conquest until the Prussian state was utterly destroyed. Bernstein himself acknowledged that this belief in an inevitable Anglo-German holocaust extended "far into the left." Indeed the case for the inevitability of war in consequence of the inner dynamic of capitalist development was argued in the *Sozialistische Monatshefte* as early as 1899.

Bebel's pessimism regarding the likelihood of war and the Social Democrats' inability to prevent war induced him to embark upon a private and secret diplomacy with Sir Edward Grey in the hope that Britain, once apprised of the reality of the danger, would take such military and diplomatic countermeasures as might suffice either to deter Prussian militarism or, at the very least, to ensure the defeat of the Prussian aggressor in the event of yet another "Silesian" war. (Bebel rationalized his "treason" in terms of class patriotism, for he feared that a Prusso-German victory would set back the cause of socialism in Germany by several generations.)<sup>51</sup> But the general response in non-socialist circles, as Bebel correctly described it, was one of resignation and capitulation on the part of the last bourgeois elements which had hitherto stood out against the blandishments of official and popular imperialism: > With the Reichstag the government can get away with anything. In armaments questions the bourgeois parties are completely cemented together and no longer have any will of their own.<sup>52</sup>

> No opposition in any of the bourgeois press. Whatever reservations exist, they are denied public expression. (*man macht die Faust im Sack*)<sup>53</sup>

This, as Bernstein also warned, formed one of the grave dangers implicit in the legend of the "English peril": belief in the inevitability of war tended to produce a closing of the ranks behind the government, a suspension of necessary criticism of the warlike propensities which were engraved in German *Weltpolitik*, thus threatening to turn the myth into a self-fulfilling prophesy. Once the myth was accepted as reality, government leaders and regulators of public opinion were always exposed to the temptation to seize the opportunity to strike while circumstances might seem to favour a German victory rather than to risk waiting until a changing balance of power put the prospect of a German victory beyond reach. Hence Moltke's famous "now or never" in July 1914. But even in 1911, as Bernstein observed, "Pan-German dreamers" were already bellowing, "Why do we have these expensive ships if we don't let them loose against England?"

In Bernstein's view the myth of the "English peril" was also a powerful factor in generating and accelerating the arms race, which he deplored on two counts. Firstly, the arms race was impeding progress towards internationalism by sowing suspicion, mistrust and nervousness among peoples and nations.<sup>56</sup> Secondly, the arms race was "undermining the welfare of the peoples and swallowing up the resources needed for the work of social reform."<sup>57</sup> Ramsay Macdonald made the same complaint in the *Sozialistische Monatshefte*: "The riches of the peoples which we so urgently need for social purposes, for smoothing the path to socialism, are being squandered on cannons and armour plating."<sup>58</sup> That Germany was universally recognized as the instigator and principal driving force behind the arms race therefore meant that she was also held partly responsible for even the domestic social ills of the other Great Powers. Südekum conceded as much to his Fabian audience in 1907 when he said, "There will be resentment here at the frightful burden of taxation thereby imposed on England.

Bernstein identified as a further consequence of the legend of the "English peril" a marked deterioration in British goodwill towards Germany. The chorus of anglophobia in the German press could not but have the effect of antagonizing Britain. What the German "poets of hate" had apparently overlooked was that "there is such a thing as an international echo, and that one cannot scream hate, hate, hate across the channel without awakening corresponding sentiments over there." A degree of backlash notwithstanding, "the desire for good relations between the two countries (remained) much stronger in England than in Germany. Under these circumstances it was "the most short-sighted, nonsensical policy to alienate the great English nation,'' particularly since Anglo-German relations had become the fulcrum of European politics, or as Südekum put it: ''Relations between England and Germany are the very key to the international situation. There will be no war in Europe without the permission of Great Britain and Germany or between them.''

All this unwarranted agitation against Britain was having the additional effect of deepening Germany's own isolation in the world. Bernstein emphasized that none of Britain's other commercial rivals showed any sign of living in fear of an imminent British attack, nor could any of them appreciate Germany's professed anxiety in this regard. On the contrary, the more loudly the German anglophobes trumpeted their nightmares abroad, the more suspicion they aroused as to the true nature of their own ambitions, especially as Germany's neighbours all felt the whip of militaristic German nationalism and the naked power policy of the German government. In the eyes of the ''democratic nations of Europe'' Germany had become ''the more immediate danger'' and replaced Russia as ''the dictator of European reaction.'' By creating an artificial conflict with Britain and simultaneously menacing her neighbours, Germany was merely driving the latter into the fold of her enemies.

Bernstein lamented the influence of the myth of the ''English peril'' not merely for its disastrous impact on international relations. He also recognized that it was having untoward repercussions in the field of domestic politics, even posing a serious threat to the Revisionist programme for the realization of democratic socialism in Germany. If there was one article of faith which united all Revisionists, this was the belief that capitalism would not tumble of its own accord, nor could it be preached into extinction by what they condemned as revolutionary prattle. (The practice of revolution itself, as they were fond of pointing out, had been condemned by Engels as no longer possible in view of the fire-power of modern armies.) Revisionism stood or fell on the conviction that socialism could be attained only through parliamentary democratic processes, which demanded, at least initially, Social Democratic co-operation with ideologically compatible bourgeois parties. By 1912, however, Bernstein was compelled to acknowledge that ''even the liberal parties (had) struck their colours before the nationalist agitation'' of the illiberal Junker-big business coterie: ''The cosmopolitan spirit has been light-heartedly surrendered and the field abandoned to nationalism. . . . It is no wonder, then, that liberalism's powers of resistance to the growing claims of militarism and navalism have completely collapsed."<sup>69</sup>

This cast serious doubt on the Revisionist conception of a liberal-socialist parliamentary alliance, for "one does not conclude alliances with a corpse."<sup>70</sup> Any compromise with such recalcitrant imperialists as the National Liberals would prove "impossible and ineffective, because internecine strife would then paralyse the (Social Democratic) party."<sup>71</sup> Thus, from Bernstein's viewpoint, the spurious conflict with Britain was also having the effect of driving Social Democracy into a domestic political cul-de-sac. This view was shared not only by other Revisionists like Südekum and Eduard David but also by Bebel.

From the turn of the century onward Bernstein devoted a considerable proportion of his journalistic output to combating what he saw as the pernicious influence of this anti-British myth.<sup>72</sup> At first his strictures against the anglophobes were motivated probably as much by his outraged anglophilia and passionate attachment to free-trade principles as by a keen awareness of the issues at stake. His writings of the late 1890s and the early years of this century certainly indicate that he shared at least some of the assumptions inherent in the world view he was consciously seeking to discredit. In his *Voraussetzungen*, for instance, he wrote: > Today many people consider the doctrine of the European balance of power outdated, and in its old form, so it is. . . . I regard it as a legitimate task of German imperial policy to secure for itself in such cases (the settlement of international disputes) the right of co-determination. . . . Where really important national interests are at stake, internationalism can be no reason for a weak yielding to the pretensions of foreign interested parties.<sup>73</sup>

The Moroccan crises, however, lent a new urgency and a clearer focus to Bernstein's efforts to warn his countrymen, and particularly his fellow socialists,<sup>74</sup> against the consequences of antagonizing Britain. In the last three years of peace Bernstein redoubled his efforts to expose the fallacies in the myth of the inevitable Anglo-German conflict and to explain to the German people the real cause of the increasingly dangerous Anglo-German antagonism.

Bernstein argued that German *Weltpolitik* was based on false premises, for there were no real conflicts of interest between Britain and Germany, only artificial ones. It was particulary untrue that Britain envied Germany her commercial success or that the British economy had any cause for serious concern over German rivalry on the world market. "What can England take from the German people?" asked Bernstein. His answer: > Nothing at all. In this country it is said that the growing competition of Germany will force the English to attempt to rid themselves of this by means of war. But (this idea) must be laid bare once and for all in all its hollowness because it is rooted in a concept of international intercourse which represents nothing less than a spiritual menace to modern civilization.<sup>75</sup>

Britain and Germany were not only rivals but also clients and major trading partners. As such they were interdependent, each having a vested interest in the prosperity of the other, for "the more well-off a country is, the better it is as a client on the world market."<sup>76</sup> Therefore it was the greatest insanity to believe that "two nations which year after year conduct peaceful commerce with each other, exchanging goods worth about twenty million marks annually, should be tormented by the thought that one of them was merely awaiting the appropriate moment to fall upon the other."<sup>77</sup> It was "criminal madness" to think that one nation should hate the other because its putative rival and best customer was becoming more prosperous, especially since the British market — "alone among the great markets of the world — admitted the products of German industry duty free."<sup>78</sup> It was therefore absurdly anachronistic of Germans to be thinking in terms of national domination of the world market: "Today we have reached a stage of development in the world economy where there can no longer be any talk of industrial leadership by any single country, and it will become increasingly a matter of leadership or the occupation of first place in particular industries,'' all of which was bound to be ephemeral and subject to violent fluctuation as technology changed.<sup>79</sup>

In any event, the British economy was more than strong enough to withstand the pace of German commercial rivalry, even ''in an epoch when England was holding firm to free trade against a cohort of rising industrial states girding themselves with protective tariffs.''<sup>80</sup> Bernstein argued repeatedly that the British economy was not declining in the face of such competition and predicted that it would not do so in the future. In 1901 he claimed that ''England's industry is still a long way from the point of extinction.''<sup>81</sup> In 1909 he discerned ''various signs (which) indicate that the climax of the menace to England posed by German competition (had) passed years ago.''<sup>82</sup> In 1911 he believed that Britain was still coping quite well with Germany's competition on the world market, so well indeed that ''for England the danger of German competition is not on the increase but on the decline.'' Objectively Britain therefore had no reason to fear German trade competition. Nor did any such fear exist in fact. Bernstein claimed to be able to fill whole volumes with evidence of British goodwill towards Germany. The notion that commercial rivalry necessarily made enemies of nations was almost entirely due to the influence of protectionist theorists in Germany. Protectionism might be all the rage in Germany, but in Britain free trade remained overwhelmingly popular and there was no prospect of the small but noisy protectionist lobby headed by Chamberlain — formerly one of the champions of an Anglo-German alliance — one day winning general acceptance of its viewpoint. That ''tariff reform'' enjoyed any following at all in Britain could not be explained as the result of German competition; it represented a protest against the unfairness of European and North American competition, backed as it was by the artificial advantages created by high tariff walls for shielding domestic markets.

In endeavouring to explode the myth of Anglo-German colonial rivalry as another form of that "irretrievable opposition which sooner or later must inevitably lead to a bloody conflict,"<sup>89</sup> Bernstein did not deny that Germany "came much too short in the matter of colonies,"<sup>90</sup> but he did challenge the claim that "wherever the German went in other parts of the world the Englishman was everywhere standing in his way."<sup>91</sup> In short, he admitted that Germany had cause for dissatisfaction. But he took issue with the view that the paucity of Germany's colonial possessions was in any way related to deliberate British obstructionism. He argued that the true explanation of this phenomenon derived from the simple fact that Germany had been "tardy in attaining national unity."<sup>92</sup> As a colonizing power Germany had therefore entered the lists as a latecomer and had suffered accordingly in terms of the quantity and quality of her colonial swag. This was hardly the fault of the British and offered no reasonable grounds for resentment or recrimination.

Bernstein sought to demonstrate that the remedy lay with none of the schemes put forward by the colonial enthusiasts or official imperialists. He pointed out that new colonies were no longer to be had. The territiories which might be suitable as colonies of settlement were already occupied. Colonial expansion in Asia promised to be a short-term and thankless enterprise in view of the rising power of Asian nationalism.<sup>93</sup> That left only a handful of Pacific islands and useless deserts in Africa, which would require enormous infusions of capital for a doubtful return in the remote future.<sup>94</sup> The only real alternative for Germany was a redistribution of existing colonial empires — the moribund empires of the Portuguese, the Spaniards, the Belgians and the Dutch<sup>95</sup> — which might become possible, but only in collaboration with Britain. Bernstein doubted that even a successful war against Britain would yield any worthwhile colonial gains for Germany: "for Germany's commercial classes there is not a single colony which might be acquired that could outweigh the value of our peaceful intercourse with Great Britain and its colonies."<sup>96</sup> The British colonies of settlement were indelibly British in character, and in Asia and Africa Germany would again encounter the difficulties of indigenous nationalism and the draining of domestic capital and other resources.<sup>97</sup> Despite all the unpleasantries which had passed between the two nations, Bernstein believed that Germany's best prospect of enlarging her colonial empire lay in the direction of an Anglo-German understanding. This was not too far-fetched a hope, for the liberal government which had held office in Britain since 1906 had "in no way shown anti-German tendencies."<sup>98</sup> After the war Bernstein cited the Anglo-German agreement on the Portuguese colonies as a vindication of his contention: "the fact is that in respect of colonial expansion Germany was in a more favourable position immediately prior to the outbreak of the war than at any previous time."<sup>99</sup>

Putting the problem in perspective, Bernstein argued that it was no great disadvantage for the German nation to be without a vast colonial empire.<sup>100</sup> The blessings of empire were not without encumbrances, which included the economic burdens entailed in the occupation and defence of the colonies<sup>101</sup> as well as the social and political strains imposed on a colonizing power through its responsibilities to its charges. Thus noncolonial powers possessed "the advantage that the spiritual energy which they command can be concentrated towards the development of science, art, industry and trade at home, whereas greater colonial possessions are always accompanied by a draft of energy which in various countries has proved to be most fatal."<sup>102</sup> In this context Bernstein quoted time and again Disraeli's description of colonies as mill-stones around the neck of the mother country.<sup>103</sup>

A further consideration which needed to be taken into account, so Bernstein argued, was the fact that colonies in general, and particularly those of free-trade, liberal England, conferred the benefits of empire on all great trading nations, and not merely on their nominal proprietors: > On the whole, it may be said that it is by no means always the colonizing country which derives the greatest economic net profit from the colonies. . . . The enrichment of the world by means of colonization also benefits, through all kinds of channels, those countries which themselves do not colonize.

Many Germans, for example, had made their fortunes in British colonies<sup>105</sup> and had done so under conditions which afforded no special advantages or privileges to British competitors.<sup>106</sup> "In no country in the world," he claimed, "have the Germans fared better than in England and its colonies."<sup>107</sup>

The only possible advantage in not having acquired a vast colonial empire of her own was the political power factor or international standing associated with colonial possessions, but this was a deceptively superficial view because power was dependent on "specifically social qualities," on "accomplishments in the sphere of science and art, industry and trade, prowess in intellectual and organizational activity;"<sup>108</sup> it was not significantly related to the extent of a nation's colonial booty. In this respect the German "had precious little to complain of with regard to his international position" in 1914,<sup>109</sup> when, "in spite of its barely moderate colonial possessions, Germany (had) become a wealthy country and was well on the way to outstripping in affluence those countries with substantial colonial holdings."<sup>110</sup> In fact "the case of Germany demonstrated beyond question that under the terms of international intercourse which prevailed before the war, the precedence in power enjoyed by certain nations presented no serious obstacle to other nations acquiring, besides economic wealth, social prominence and political influence outside their own territory."<sup>111</sup>

Bernstein's post-1911 emphasis on the luxury character of empire represents one instance of significant change in his otherwise coherent and consistent assessment of the Anglo-German problem. In 1900 he regarded a German colonial empire comparable to that of Britain as desirable if not necessary. For this reason he stressed the advantages and civilizing role of empire as offering sufficient grounds for the adoption of a more "positive" Social Democratic attitude towards *Kolonialpolitik*. But he was greatly alarmed by the 1911 Moroccan crisis and equally disconcerted by the writings of fellow-Revisionists like Gerhard Hildebrand, who insisted that Germany must acquire a vast colonial empire in the near future, by one means or another, or face certain ruin as a Great Power. Instead of stressing the desirability of colonies Bernstein now argued emphatically that they were at best only marginally pertinent to German greatness or even to German prosperity; they were certainly not worth the risk of a world war. After 1911 Bernstein implicitly accepted the proposition that colonial rivalry was fast becoming a genuine source of friction between Germany and England, entering the caveat that the issue assumed this gravity only because German imperialists subjectively and erroneously accorded it such. He continued to argue that objectively the colonial issue was no more a cause of Anglo-German estrangement than was the phantom of British "commercial envy."

Under these circumstances the claim that British diplomacy — "represented to the German petty bourgeois as a monstrous amalgam of baseness and cunning"<sup>112</sup> — was endeavouring to isolate and encircle Germany was nothing short of the most reprehensible deception of the German people.<sup>113</sup> Far from being an aggressive instrument designed by Britain for curtailing German freedom and stunting the development of the German nation, the Triple Entente had originated in response to sustained and serious German naval and diplomatic provocation:<sup>114</sup> "It is an indisputable fact that it was German naval policy which drove England into the arms of France. The same cause effected the agreement between England and Russia."<sup>115</sup> "In our present society," Bernstein warned, "the principle of collectivity (*Gemeinhaftung*) has progesssed to such a point where no great nation can seriously impinge on another great nation in its conditions of existence without harming its own interests in the process."<sup>116</sup> In baiting Britain in this sense, Germany had been the architect of her own encirclement.

 But the Triple Entente was more than a product of diabolically clever British diplomacy reacting to German provocation, and by the same token there was more to Germany's isolation than the Triple Entente. In reality Germany was "thoroughly unpopular as a nation"<sup>117</sup> not merely in the Entente countries but in the world at large, and with good reason. As a liberal political writer observed, Denmark was a case in point. There no nation was so popular and respected as the English: The English are viewed of the natural protectors against rape by Germany. Nowhere are the officials of the German Empire welcomed. 
 
 Numerous commentators testified to this universal antipathy towards Germany, which had "more enemies than any other state"<sup>120</sup> because of the mistrust sown by its hothouse armaments policy, its bullying diplomacy and the offensive manner of its nationalist press.<sup>121</sup> At best, Germany was feared by her neighbours great and small as a dangerously erratic, "bragging fire-eater,"<sup>122</sup> but many would have agreed with Kurt Eisner, who claimed that the "civilized states of Western Europe" were fully convinced as early as the 1905 Moroccan crisis that "German imperialism is merely waiting for the right moment in order to revolutionize the map of the globe."<sup>123</sup>

If German isolation was essentially a self-inflicted wound, it need not be a mortal wound unless Germany herself chose to make it so. As long as Germany pursued a consistent peace policy, she had not the slightest occasion for anxiety over her security or integrity.<sup>124</sup> There was no reason to believe that Britain would ever join France or Russia in aggression against the Reich,<sup>125</sup> and matters "would take a regrettable turn only if there existed on the German side the intention or desire one day to deprive Britain of a part of her possessions by violent means."<sup>126</sup> The Triple Entente did not in any way constrict German colonial development or scotch German colonial aspirations.<sup>127</sup> Nor did it rule out the possibility of a restoration of close and friendly ties between Britain and Germany:

> It would not require too much effort on the part of Germany to establish better relations with England. The present liberal government of England, which has to deal with a strong peace party in its own camp, has so frequently manifested its desire for good relations with Germany that one may fairly speak of an English courtship in which the German Reich has continually played the coy one.<sup>128</sup>

As late as September 1911, long after the formation of the Entente and despite several serious Anglo-German clashes over the navy, Morocco and other bones of contention, Bernstein continued to maintain the "many respected politicians and major newspapers in England were advocating an accommodation of Germany's colonial wishes."<sup>129</sup> Indeed "Britain repeatedly made proposals to Germany for close collaboration (but) Germany always rejected them."<sup>130</sup> The price which Germany asked for her friendship was a British promise of neutrality in the event of war. This Britain could hardly accede to without one day placing herself at the mercy of Germany.

Thus Bernstein endeavoured to show that the myth of Entente encirclement masterminded by a jaundiced, splenetic and perfidious Albion was without any foundation in fact. On his analysis, both the Entente and German isolation had been produced primarily by German policy. The Entente posed no real threat to a peaceful Germany, nor did it necessarily isolate the Reich. In fact Germany could at any time arrive at a close understanding with Britain if only she would drop her unreasonable demand that Britain virtually abdicate her world-power position and become a janissary of the exorbitant ambitions cherished by the German ruling classes. It need hardly be said that in his assessment of the situation Bernstein allowed his anglophilia to run away with his reason in that he vastly overrated the willingness of the British liberals to accommodate the colonial and other aspirations of their German cousins.

In Bernstein's view commercial, colonial, naval and diplomatic rivalry were all symptomatic of a deeper and more meaningful difference. This difference was ideological in nature and reflected the fact that whereas Britain was liberal, Germany was fundamentally illiberal: > It cannot be emphasized often enough: ninety-nine percent of our fear and hatred of England rests on wholly anachronistic political and commercial ideas. . . . What the development of Germany is suffering from in the field of world politics as well, is legacies from the age of conquest. These still trail about behind her. > The question of our relations with England is a question of two different world views. He who is unable to comprehend that two great industrial nations might be able to live side by side and get along together without having to arm to the teeth against each other cannot believe in the possibility of creating an international solidarity of nations; he cannot be an unreserved supporter of democracy; he cannot be even a consistent liberal. Here, in fact, is the dividing line.

In keeping with the spirit of the age and the forward march of civilization, Britain was liberal and progressive, democratic and internationalist. Germany, on the other hand, remained undemocratic, militaristic, power-political, autarkic and reactionary.

Bernstein did not regard German illiberalism as being immutable, for it was not dependent on personalities or policies but was historically based without being systemic. "One forgets too easily," he wrote, "that ideologies do not come out of the blue but are historical phenomena which arise out of particular conditions and change with them."<sup>135</sup> Thus German militarism — in contrast to Russian militarism — "is not itself founded in the superstructure of the Reich."<sup>136</sup> Through the parliamentary activity of the Reichstag it was therefore possible to change the character of even the Prusso-German army, indeed to convert it, if not into the popular militia demanded by the Erfurt Programme, then at least into a "democratized" military force that would be employed as a genuine instrument of national defence and neither as a repressive tool of the Prussian class state nor as a weapon of aggression against other peoples.<sup>137</sup> As a Revisionist, Bernstein naturally emphasized this point. To accept the proposition that the reactionary Prusso-German class state could only be destroyed and rebuilt from the foundations upward would have been to abandon the entire Revisionist position to the Kautsky-Bebel orthodoxy.

Immutable or not, German illiberalism was deeply rooted in history, geography and tradition, in "Germany's unhappy situation and her unfortunate history."<sup>138</sup> As it happened, the traditions of Prussia-Germany were those of the repressive Junker power state (*Machtstaat*) built on conquest and subjugation: "There is not one major modern state which has done so little to win the love of the peoples as has Germany. . . . Even Germany's democratic parties have often enough been compelled to behave negatively towards liberation movements."<sup>139</sup> Since the liberal failure of 1848, the Junker spirit had gradually penetrated and finally enthralled the bourgeoisie, who had become "still more chauvinistic than the Junkers."<sup>140</sup> Worse still, it had begun to filter through to Social Democracy as well. The influence of Prussianism, with its insatiable lust for conquest and its contempt for human rights, was clearly apparent in the social imperialist writings of several of Bernstein's own Revisionist col- leagues.<sup>141</sup> In 1900, for example, Richard Calwer called for a "Greater Germany," which he envisaged as an economically integrated continental block with France and Germany as its core. He argued that this goal could be realized peacefully after the manner in which Prussia had unified Germany through the *Zollverein*, thereby begging the question of Bismarck's wars. Calwer spoke of the projected European union not as a partnership of equals but as "a closer commercial *Anschluβ* to Germany."<sup>142</sup> Obviously he was not anticipating the EEC. The idea of a German-dominated Central European union or United States of Europe directed against the USA, Britain and Russia also found support from left-wing and centre-left spokesman like Alexander Helphand (Parvus), Heinrich Cunow, Paul Lensch, Georg Ledebour, Max Beer and even August Bebel.<sup>143</sup> Recognizing the implications of such thinking, Bernstein declared his opposition to the idea of even a Central European customs union: "we consider the realization of such a union highly improbable and by no means desirable."<sup>144</sup>

As Bernstein saw it, the ideology of chauvinistic illiberalism had put Germany on a collision course with Britain because the spirit of Prussianism, having devoured all Germany and established a de facto hegemony on the European continent, was now playing for world dominion, which Britain would not and could not allow. (Even a British liberal government would "rather allow matters to come to armed conflict than acquiesce in a situation where England was pushed aside by Germany."<sup>145</sup>) Anglophobia in Germany was in essence "the hate of the bourgeoisie who have more or less arrived against the (British) grandseigneurs who are still wont to look down upon them. . . . A thin upper layer (in German society) found it disagreeable that there were so many places out there where the Germans did not play first fiddle."<sup>146</sup> All else flowed from this desire to play first fiddle — the seemingly irrational power politics of unilateral interventionism, the dangerous essays in brinkmanship and the provocative battleship navy. Even protectionism was "nothing but an excrescence of political imperialism making itself serviceable to economic policy."<sup>147</sup> The conflict with Britain was a "purely political one"<sup>148</sup> in that it was a struggle for world power and not merely for the conquest of markets.<sup>149</sup> This was what Bernstein meant when he said that "national antagonisms . . . have their roots in relations of governance and exploitation" (*Herrschafts- und Ausbeutungsbeziehungen*).<sup>150</sup>

Bernstein felt that the deplorable state of Anglo-German relations could be and must be reversed, both in the national interest and in the interest of the Revisionist programme. At one stroke the restoration of Anglo-German amity promised to defuse the arms race, make a European war all but impossible, end German diplomatic isolation, check the disruptive world trend towards mercantilism, open up the prospect of significant and worthwhile colonial acquisitions, afford Germany a free hand against "Russian barbarism," and bring the civilized world closer to the realization of "the one great republic of peoples."<sup>151</sup> Instead of the international pariah she then was, Germany would assume her rightful place in the sun as England's junior partner in a global condominium which no conceivable combination of powers could seriously resist. Such a development could only redound to the good of all mankind because British imperialism, marked as it was by that "strongly democratic, libertarian trait,"<sup>152</sup> must oblige German imperialism to emulate "that element of democracy which is intrinsic to contemporary English imperialism."<sup>153</sup> For Bernstein was convinced that British imperialism, being thoroughly progressive in nature and function, would never align itself to reactionary imperialism,<sup>154</sup> an article of faith which led him to over-emphasize the tenuous character of the Anglo-Russian Entente.<sup>155</sup>

Above all, Bernstein, like Bebel, cherished the hope that the re-establishment of friendly ties with Britain would at last encourage the German bourgeoisie to cease toadying to the reactionary Junker-big business elites and to stand up for its true class interests as it had done, all too briefly, in 1848. Once bourgeois radicalism shook off the dead-weight of the ideological yoke of reactionary Junkerdom and began to press for its natural objective, the realization of parliamentary democracy in the Reich,<sup>156</sup> German liberalism would again move within a Social Democratic ambience. A parliamentary alliance between bourgeois liberalism and proletarian socialism would then be on the agenda of history and progress would become a real possibility in Germany.<sup>157</sup> Only then would Germany become "a fully-fledged liberal country," a prospect heralded by Bernstein's friend Graham Wallas — in a judgment which Bernstein endorsed — as "the greatest event for Europe since the Battle of the Nations."<sup>158</sup>

But the German bourgeoisie had become so demoralized by its association with Junkerdom that a powerful external stimulus was needed to stiffen its backbone. Under existing circumstances the desired parliamentary alliance remained highly improbable as long as the bourgeoisie was hamstrung by its fear of Social Democracy<sup>159</sup> and its equally crippling chauvinism.<sup>160</sup> These red herrings had been drawn across its path by the Junker-big business reactionaries, distracting and debilitating the whole of bourgeois democracy. Believing that "bourgeois democratic liberalism will only acquire the strength to resist through co-operation with working-class democracy, with Social Democracy,"<sup>161</sup> Bernstein dared to hope that the external stimulus required to break this log-jam might be provided by an Anglo-German understanding. He evidently felt that an entente or settlement of outstanding differences would suffice, or that more could not be hoped for, as he never openly advocated an Anglo-German alliance, although he did take to task those responsible for the rejection of the British overtures at the turn of the century.<sup>162</sup>

Eduard Bernstein, the chief ideologue of German Revisionism, was therefore keenly interested in the problem of Anglo-German relations. Before, during and after the Great War he wrote several pamphlets on the subject and dealt with it in numerous articles, most of them published in the Revisionist *Sozialistische Monatshefte*. His analysis was remarkably consistent, informed and often highly perceptive, although by no means free of errors, contradictions and plain wishful thinking. His position in 1914 was identical in essentials with the views he held in 1901, when he returned to Germany after thirteen years residence in London. This experience, which had leavened his Marxism with a profound and enduring admiration for British liberalism and left him a confirmed anglophile, nourished his Revisionism and his foreign policy perspective as well as his approach to the Anglo-German question in particular. His attitude towards this issue was integrally related to his foreign policy thinking generally—tariff policy, imperialism and *Kolonialpolitik*—all of which was closely bound up with his Revisionism. His observations on the Anglo-German problem hark back repeatedly to such fundamental preoccupations as his faith in democracy as a panacea or his conviction that for Social Democracy the way ahead lay through parliamentary democracy via a grand block from Bebel to Bassermann.

Setting his views in the context of the party, one cannot but notice that Bernstein's foreign policy position was of an altogether different stamp from that of most of his ostensible allies. It is true that a handful of leading Revisionists—neo-Kantian ethical socialists like Kurt Eisner and South German Reformists like Südekum and David—also championed pro-English free-trade ideas, although none of them did so as passionately, consistently or conspicuously as did Bernstein. Yet the fact remains that the most outspoken and influential exponents of Revisionist foreign policy views—Joseph Bloch, Karl Leuthner, Max Schippel, Richard Calwer, Gerhard Hildebrand, Ludwig Quessel and Max Maurenbrecher—were inveterate protectionists and irreconcilable anglophobes who proceeded from illiberal, nationalistic assumptions to preach an ever more overt social imperialism. This is not the place for a discussion of the foreign policy views of the radical left, but it is nonetheless appropriate to note that one reason why the Revisionist right was able to carry off its more or less open advocacy of social imperialism—Hildebrand's expulsion from the party in 1912 was the exception which proves the rule—was that the party left was also at least potentially divided on the question of imperialism. The Revisionist right could and did take refuge in arguments advanced from impeccably Marxist premises by people like Parvus, Haenisch, Lensch and Pannekoek, arguments condemning opposition to imperialism as futile, un-Marxist and calculated to impede the advent of socialism. By citing chapter and verse from its arch-enemies, Revisionist social imperialism could therefore masquerade as non-sectarian scholarship, pleading honest difference of opinion for its betrayal of socialist internationalism.

Bernstein, on the other hand, quite accurately described his foreign policy position as "parteiorthodox." His position on Anglo-German relations in particular was fully consonant with Social Democratic tradition and, in essentials, closely paralleled the Bebel-Kautsky viewpoint, although Kautsky's analysis of imperialism laid greater emphasis on the economic factor than on the national hubris of Imperial Germany.<sup>163</sup> The explanation of Bernstein's affinity with the party centre lies in their common indebtedness to the ideals of bourgeois radicalism. This debt was especially strong in the sphere of foreign policy because Marxism provided no clear guidelines for a specifically socialist standpoint in international relations. Having little else to go by, and since the German socialists "had never completely severed their former connections with the liberal movement,"<sup>164</sup> orthodox foreign policy spokesman tended to draw heavily on the assumptions of traditional free-trade liberalism.<sup>165</sup> After the Hottentot elections of 1907 this became increasingly apparent in the party centre. It had always been true of Bernstein.

As Dieter Groh reminds us, the process of factional realignment which began in December 1914 was significantly more complex than has often been suggested.<sup>166</sup> Whereas former radicals joined with the In his commentary on the Erfurt Programme, Kautsky wrote: "Hand in hand with the tendency towards the fraternisation of peoples goes the tendency towards the intensification of national antagonisms. Commerce requires peace, but competition creates war. . . . These seemingly insane contradictions are in complete accord with the capitalist mode of production

Revisionist social imperialists on the far right of the party, Social Democracy as a movement succumbed to the now omnipotent *Praktiker*. All factions blew out their brains. Most of these brains found their way to the USPD. Among them was Eduard Bernstein, now a social pacifist in the company of almost all his erstwhile foes of the party centre, centre-left and radical left. This multiple splintering of the SPD of Imperial Germany cannot be explained adequately in terms of right versus left under pressure of events. This much is certain: Bernstein made his break with the party, probably the most momentous step in his political career, not in consequence of his Revisionism as such but in strict conformity with his previously held views on foreign policy in general and the Anglo-German problem in particular.
