The influence of Durkheim and his collaborators and students has, as is universally acknowledged, been immense across a whole range of subjects in what now constitute the fields of anthropology, sociology and comparative religion. Some of these effects have been substantive and empirical, but others, and undoubtedly the more important ones in the history of the human sciences, have been either theoretical or methodological. In the case of the first, one thinks of Mauss on gift relationships and on magic, Hertz on death and, Durkheim himself on religion. In the case of the second, there is Durkheim on the rules of sociological method and subsequently Halbwachs on suicide. The developments initiated by the durkheimian school in these and other fields are now exhaustively documented and are the subject of continuing commentary but still pose the point of departure for fresh work (e.g. Yan 1996). What is less fully examined is the influence of Durkheim and his colleagues on the conceptualization and categorization of sociological and anthropological knowledge itself, particularly as this was expressed through the evolution of the seminal journal the *Année sociologique*. It is worthy of study in itself as one of the very early texts of contemporary social science.

The significance of the *Année sociologique* in its role in propelling the development of anthropology and sociology can fruitfully be approached at a number of levels. One, as a major force in the institutionalization of French sociology at the turn of the century. Two, as a goldmine of ideas, methods and problems for later generations of social scientists, for example the now classical issue of gift exchange, or the significance of indigenous classificatory systems for anthropology. Three, as the ways in which members of the *Année sociologique* school saw knowledge about the social universe in terms of its still evolving and as yet unclarified nature, its internal divisions and the relationships between these divisions.

Here I am only concerned with the third aspect of the *Année sociologique* as a specific text - the journal itself. I am not concerned with the associated *Travaux de l'Année sociologique* (the series of monographs published contemporaneously by the Librairie Félix Alcan, or with those works published independently by the contributors to the *Année sociologique* itself, important though these clearly are. I focus on something more limited, but perhaps more revealing from the point of view of establishing the role of the *Année sociologique* itself in the history of sociological and anthropological ideas. This is a specific analysis of the categories of sociological knowledge as they were developed and refined in the first two series of the *Année*, i.e. 1896-1912 and 1923-25, with a brief glance at the subsequent history of these categories in the third series (from 1940).

The *Année sociologique* throughout its history and under its various editors was, with the exception of the First Series, volumes 11 and 12 (1906-9 and 1909-12), divided into two sections. The first of these, *Mémoires originaux*, contained original papers, often of substantial length. The second, *Analyses*, was made up for the most part of what today would be called review articles, since their size, scope and intention frequently exceeded that of ordinary book reviews, although these, too, were included in this section. While many of the papers published in the *Mémoires originaux* section became widely known to posterity as classics of French anthropology, for example Mauss's 'Essai sur le don' or Durkheim and Mauss's 'Des quelques formes primitives de classification', the physically more extensive section of *Analyses* is now hardly considered. This is a mistake since the *Analyses* contain not only a running account of the great body of literature appearing during the period of the publication of the first two series of the journal, but even more significantly, they establish a steadily evolving classification of such sociological knowledge. This is important both for the invention and stabilization of the divisions of the subject that have come down to us today, and as a contemporary record of the intellectual history of the French social sciences themselves. It is to the detailed examination of these evolving categories of sociological knowledge that I now want to turn since the subject has so far been only very briefly alluded to in the durkheimian literature (e.g. Lukes 1973:291-2).

The *Année sociologique* embodies a very durkheimian division of labour at two levels. The first is that it constituted a collective enterprise. The associate editors were those who wrote the actual contents of the journal, and in the case of the *Analyses*, reviewed those areas of the literature in which they were specialists. The second is that the contents of the *Année sociologique* itself represented a division of the totality of the social sciences and the establishment of a relationship between the special sciences of society (in particular economics and social statistics) and sociology proper (see also Durkheim 1893b). The review or survey section was from the outset conceived of as being a creative rather than a simply reportive part of the overall scheme of the journal. The 'natural divisions of sociology' were accordingly something to be debated and explored, both in terms of the internal organization of sociology proper and of the mapping of the relationships between sociology and the 'special sciences' related to it. This involved as a first step the evolution of a classificatory scheme: 'All *Analyses* of works which refer to the same question have been grouped together in such a way that they complement and illustrate each other. By themselves these groupings already constitute comparisons which may be useful' (Durkheim 1898a:vii). We can, I believe, argue convincingly that the specification of the classifications for understanding the divisions of social knowledge represents a key to the theoretical development of the *Année sociologique* group, and through them to the subsequent institutionalization of the sub-fields of sociological knowledge which still dominate (and possibly now distort) the discipline today.

The first volume of the journal must naturally be taken as the chronological starting-point as we turn our focus not to the many, subsequently republished in book form, *Mémoires originaux*, but to the *Analyses*. In the first volume the *Analyses* were divided into six major sections and each in turn was sub-divided. The first and most general section consisted of 'philosophical sociology', 'biological sociology' and 'social psychology and sociology as such' (*spécifique*). The second division, defined as 'religious sociology' comprises the sub-divisions of 'general treatises' including questions of method and philosophy, 'primitive religions in general', 'domestic cults', 'beliefs and practices concerning the dead', 'popular cults in general and especially agrarian ones', 'ritual', 'myth', 'organization of cults' and notes on monasticism. The third major division - 'moral and juridical sociology' - contains 'general theories of law and morals', 'studies of custom' (*mœurs*), 'the family', 'marriage', 'punishment', 'social organization', 'the law of property', and 'miscellaneous'. The fourth division - 'criminal sociology' - is divided into 'moral statistics' and 'criminal anthropology'. The fifth division - 'economic sociology' - comprises 'economic theory', 'professional groups', 'the history of labour' and 'commercial development' (*évolution*). The final division - 'miscellaneous' (*divers*) groups together 'anthroposociology', 'socio-geography', 'demographic questions' and 'the problem of depopulation'.

In the second volume this embryonic system of classification is considerably altered, not in its major, but in its minor divisions. Thus, in general sociology 'methodology' (including discussions of the relationship between sociology and history and sociology and psychology) is introduced and 'philosophical sociology' (*sociologie philosophique*) becomes 'social philosophy' (*philosophie sociale*), a significant distinction. In religious sociology magic and sorcery make an appearance, and the 'great religions' begin to receive some attention. The section on moral and juridical sociology expands its scope to include new sub-sections on social ecology (*mœurs selon l'habitat*), sexual morality, women, penal law, which displaces the previous volume's 'On punishment', social and political organization and liability (*la responsabilité*). Criminal sociology adds 'criminal psychiatry'. Economic sociology undergoes a considerable expansion, including wider questions of theory (*Conception de la science économique*) and sections on primitive, ancient, classical, medieval and modern economics and on social movements. Part six of the *Analyses* signals an important innovation with a section written by Durkheim himself on 'social morphology', including general issues, 'social density' and urban groups. The miscellaneous section now appears as division seven, but is actually more significant in content than its title suggests, containing in the second volume reviews on collective ethnology and methodological questions on statistics as well as the old 'anthroposociology'.

By volume three the general pattern is set and the major classifications shift only in relatively minor ways with the section on religious sociology, for instance, remaining quite static. But important classificatory change continues in the *Année sociologique* in the constant rethinking and reformulation of the sub-sections, and it is to this internal evolution that I will now turn. (Numbers in brackets refer to volume numbers of the *Année sociologique*).


The evolution of this section is marked by a move from a sub-section entitled 'civilization and progress'(3), which then extends itself through 'social evolution' (4) to stabilize as 'civilization in general and types of civilization' (5-8). This is complemented by a stress on social psychology understood from the point of view of Durkheim's theory of collective representations - initially (3) *personalité collective*, then (4 and 5) *la mentalité des groupes, la mentalité des groupes et l'ethnologie collective* (6 and 7) and then the final stage of seeing social psychology under the rubric, which has since provided the title or sub-title of many texts in that field, the 'individual and society' (8). The same broad category of general sociology, which it is interesting to note in the light of Durkheim's subsequent intellectual direction subsumes psychology, also periodically (4 and 8) covered the history of sociological thought, and introduced race (5) which became a regular sub-heading with volume 9. One point to note is the way in which certain categories merge and then bifurcate again, such as the 'mentality of groups' which sometimes appears alone and sometimes combined with 'collective ethnology' (6 for example).


As was noted above, this section remains relatively stable, except that certain categories are simply not included in some volumes. Conceptual innovation otherwise is slight, with 'elementary religious phenomena' (4) replacing 'primitive religions' (3) and being displaced in turn with the first use of the phrase 'elementary forms of the religious life' (5). The phrase appeared in Durkheim's major book *Les formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse* over a decade later in 1912. The reviews on religion in volume 5 are by Hubert and Mauss, suggesting that much mutual influence was at work within the inner circle of the *Année sociologique* and that its ideas were collectively evolved and collectively utilized.


This section, like its predecessor, is distinguished less by fundamental breaks from year to year than by the gradual refinement of internal classifications. The category of law is progressively broadened to include penal law and questions of responsibility (2), contract, juridical procedure (3), criminal law as distinguished from criminology as such, and comparative morality and legal systems (4), the social consequences of legal judgments (5) and commercial and international law (8). Within the field of 'moral sociology' the question of women occupies an important and continuing place once it is introduced in volume 2. Questions of domestic organization as such become distinguished with volume 4 from social and from familial factors, and with volume 5 a distinction is made between social and political organization as analytical categories.


This begins simply with the two sub-divisions of 'moral statistics' and 'criminal anthropology', and makes perhaps the most rapid development in its sub-categories. In volume 2 criminal psychiatry is introduced, in volume 3, comparative criminology. In volume 4 the section is retitled *Sociologie criminelle et statistique morale* and widens its scope accordingly to embrace statistical work on domestic and conjugal life and sexual morality, as well as criminal associations, the workings of the prison system and varieties of criminal and 'immoral behaviour', the latter lumped together as a single category. With volume 6 suicide is introduced as a sub-section for the first time, and in volume 7 juvenile criminality likewise puts in a first appearance. By volume 8 it is noticeable that the emphasis has passed from statistics to institutional factors - morality in civil life, collective criminality, economic factors in crime and children and crime all making an appearance. After volume 8 these categories remain fairly stable.


The section begins its life almost as simply as does criminal sociology, comprising initially 'economic theories', 'professional groups', the 'history of labour' and 'commercial development'. In volume 2 this simple schema is, as has been noted above, transformed into a mixture of analytical-general and theoretical economics, including, interestingly, social movements, on the one hand, and a chronological division on the other, into primitive, ancient, classical, medieval and modern forms of economy. With volume 3 this scheme is abandoned in favour of a generally more analytical framework, including methodological considerations, general and particular types of economies, mechanisms of production and distribution, local and national economies, social theories and a section on socialism. In volume 4 this basic pattern is further refined with the addition of a sub-section on economic classes and another on political economy. With volume 7 this latter section becomes identified with the role of state activity in the economy. With volume 8 the old category of *Elements de la répartition* is joined by a section on money, price and value.


Three factors govern the importance of this section: (i) the creation of a new division with volume 2 to include the material regarded as miscellaneous or uncategorizable in the first volume; (ii) the growing importance in the minds of the editors of many of the topics initially dumped into this category as the social sciences rapidly developed in Europe between 1896 and the mid-1920s and the relationship between what had initially been seen as peripheral subjects and the major categories of sociological knowledge; and (iii) the fate of many of the subjects relegated to the miscellany limbo, and which never emerged from it. These will be discussed more fully shortly. Before doing that it is necessary to examine the contents of this odd section as it developed and was clarified. As has been noted, with volume 2 the old divers material became 'social morphology' with the status of a category and a name of its own. In volume 2 *Divers* was left with three sub-topics, two of them to modern ears with a decidedly nineteenth-century ring - *Ethnologie collective* and *Anthroposociologie* - and one with a rather more contemporary title - *Questions de méthodologie statistique*. Collective ethnology subsequently disappeared into the first section of the macro-classificatory scheme of the *Année sociologique* i.e into 'general sociology' from volume 5. This was offset, however by, the brief gain to Divers of 'socio-aesthetics' in volume 3, which was itself dropped or rather transformed into 'technology' in volume 4. In volume 5 'language' makes its first appearance, together with the new sub-heading of 'war' and in the subsequent volume language (*la langage*) is renamed linguistics (*linguistique*). Also, in volume 5 socialism is relegated to the miscellaneous category from its previous location under 'Economic Sociology' and in volume 7 education appears for the first time. Thereafter the miscellaneous section is relatively stable throughout the first and into the second series of the *Année sociologique*. In the Second Series, which only consisted of two volumes (1923-4 and 1924-5) the stabilization of the categories is further consolidated with minor elaborations, which I will return to in further detail below.


So much for the detailed breakdown. But what is the significance of this seemingly scholastic decoding and why might it be important? The answer I suggest lies in the way in which this particular classification of sociological knowledge has become institutionalized or crystallized into the contemporary sub-divisions of sociology and anthropology, as a glance at the contents page of almost any introductory textbook in either of these fields will reveal. This of course did not take place immediately. For example, several of the residual categories of the *Année sociologique's* original classificatory scheme have in fact moved from the periphery to the centre of the framework of sociological knowledge. Perhaps the most notable example of this is language. Yet problems of art, today a minor field of sociology, on the contrary appear continuously, even though they do not struggle to the surface, as it were in an actual *Mémoire original* until the first volume of the Third Series (1940-48), something which even then never happens with language. In the light of the preoccupation - even obsession - of the post-structuralist intellectual movements in France with language, evident as one thinks in Lacan, Derrida, Barthes and their colleagues (Sturrock 1998) this is interesting, although not inexplicable. The impetus for a revitalized linguistics in France during the period under review from 1896 to 1924 came not from the emergent social sciences, but primarily from the work of Ferdinand de Saussure and his students (Ardener 1971). Although Meillet, who was influenced by de Saussure, was the editor of the language section of the *Année sociologique* (vols 5 ff.), language itself never came to occupy a central role in the school's conception, either of the social world or of the philosophical and psychological issues bearing on it. This neglect of language is partly due to the association of issues of language with certain kinds of philosophy, especially the Comtean variety, the 'ideological contaminations' of which Durkheim was keen to distinguish from true sociology (Durkheim 1974) and partly due to its being subsumed under the consideration of psychological factors. It will be recalled that Durkheim fought an extended battle not against psychology, but against the confusion of psychological and sociological explanations of the same levels of subject matter and the reductionism that this implied. The position was most forcefully and polemically expressed in the *Rules of Sociological Method*. While language as such was granted no special place in the durkheimian conception of society, a good deal of 'philological' work did appear in the reviews section of the *Année sociologique*, especially from the pen of Bourgin the archivist (but not from the pen of his namesake the sociologist Bourgin).

The rejection of Comteanism and of psychological reductionism, however, does not indicate a lack of interest in either philosophy or psychology as such (cf. ibid.), but rather the transformation of such interest into concrete forms. The contributors to the *Année sociologique* showed a perennial interest in the philosophical and psychological aspects of religion for example. But much of this interest appears in unusual contexts, such as in the sections on general sociology and more especially in criminal sociology and moral statistics and in moral and juridical sociology where the issues under discussion are treated as much to a philosophical as to an empiricist analysis. This interest in the philosophical and psychological aspects of social phenomena derives not only from Durkheim himself but also from those of his colleagues who were essentially sociologists but with a bias in that direction. One recalls Halbwachs, Mauss and Hubert. But it comes, too, from the inclusion in the editorial board of philosophers as such as Parodi in the earlier years and Lévy-Bruhl in the later ones.

A further point can be made about the internal divisions of the philosophical and psychological sections. Volume 1 for instance contains sub-sections on both philosophical sociology and psychological sociology. With volume 2 this classification is modified to sociology and psychology (a sub-division of methodology) and social philosophy. In the same volume criminal sociology introduces its new sub-section on criminal psychiatry and anthropology. Thereafter the philosophical sub-division remains either as social philosophy or as part of the methodology sub-section. Psychology on the other hand undergoes more and more distinctions, manifesting at various times as individual personality and collective personality (3), the mentality of groups (4 and 5) and 'the individual and society' (8). What also needs to be stressed is that the significance of the journal's philosophical awareness is reflected not simply in the classifications that it imposed on the organization of emerging sociological knowledge, but even more so in the general philosophical awareness that it brought to the understanding of social phenomena. The profound effect of this, largely lost though it is in modern Anglo-American sociology and anthropology, can be seen in the interpretative models of the contributors to the *Année sociologique*, and also in their influence on subsequent generations of French sociologists - for example on Lévi-Strauss (1950; 1960).

A second major question is that of the subsequent history of the classificatory schemes worked out in the early editions of the *Année sociologique*, especially with reference to those divisions that have remained with us and those that have vanished. To some extent a distinction must be made here between French sociology and anthropology on the one hand, and British and North American varieties of those disciplines on the other. The latter have developed separate and often very different traditions, and in many cases far more under the influence of German philosophical and sociological work than the French social sciences have ever been. Here one thinks of the influence of Boas on American anthropology or Weber on British sociology for example.

So on the 'negative' side there appears in the first two series of the *Année sociologique* classifications which have never occupied a place in Anglo-American sociology and anthropology, such as 'philosophical sociology', 'criminal anthropology', 'social morphology', 'anthroposociology', 'group mentality', and 'collective ethnology', together with others that have impinged but little, such as 'moral statistics', 'religious representations' and (at least until Samuel Huntington) 'civilizations'. Others remained becalmed for three quarters of a century and have only recently re-emerged as significant categories. Perhaps the most significant example of this is 'economic sociology', a category invented by the *Année sociolgoique*, but which never, until the last decade, occupied any important role either in sociology or in academic economics. Since then however, at least in sociology, it has burgeoned into a major and active sub-field.

But while some categories never took root at all as accepted divisions of sociological knowledge, others clearly have their origin in the *Année sociologique*. One can find for example, 'the science of mythology', 'criminology', 'the sociological study of the professions', 'social geography', 'the sociology of law', together with the sociological study of classes and the emergence of the sociology of knowledge from its philosophical and psychological origins (Third Series, volume 1). In many cases ideas that were formed in reviewing the material included in the *Analyses* later emerged in extended book form by the original reviewers, such as Parodi on sociological influences on philosophy (Parodi 1919).

It is instructive here to compare the contents of earlier and later volumes of the *Année sociologique* in this respect. In the first volume of the Third Series (1940) the *Analyses* are divided into: 1. Sociologie générale et morphologie sociale (ouvrages generaux, sociologie et psychologie, sociologie et personnalisme, les grandes doctrines, bases géographiques de la vie sociale, les groupements ruraux, les groupements urbains, population, géographie politique); 2. Les sociétés non-différenciées (généralités, Afrique, Amérique, Asie, Oceanie, problèmes coloniaux, note sur le folk-lore); 3. Sociologie religieuse (generalités, Egypte, Inde, Judaisme, Islam, Christianisme); and 4. Sociologie de la connaisance et psychologie collective. By the Third Series, volume 24, these classifications have been simplified and their internal sub-divisions removed to form nine groups: 1. Sociologie générale et sociologie politique; 2. Sociologie et psychologie; 3. Morphologie sociale; 4. Systèmes sociaux et civilisations; 5. Sociologie religieuse; 6.

The brief Second Series (1923-5) with only two volumes represents an interesting transition in two senses. In the purely organizational sense it indicates the stabilization of the early categories. In the First Series one senses a search-in-progress, an annual adjustment of the framework into which the emergent social science knowledge could be fitted. By the Second a stabilization has occurred, a sense of consensus about the most workable patterns of organization which still holds sway twenty-five years later when the Third Series is initiated. This consolidated vision consequently needs some comment and this I will shortly make. But in addition to the structural characteristics of the Second Series one also sees an ideological shift. Here Mauss as the senior editor begins to emerge from Durkheim's shadow and starts to speak with a distinct voice of his own in editing the journal. For it is in this brief series and in the space of just two volumes that Mauss not only makes his own major statement on his vision of the nature of sociology, but also publishes one of his own seminal works - for example, the 'Essai sur le don' - while continuing the tradition of allowing the *Analyses* to provide a multi-voiced commentary on the development of the disciplines represented.

The first volume of the Second Series appropriately and as one might expect contains a memorial notice of Durkheim, followed by Mauss's classic essay on the gift. The *Analyses* follow the broad pattern established by the end of the First Series - Sociologie generale, which includes sub-sections on psychology and sociology; 'Doctrines' meaning ideologies, socialism and the study of specific theorists such as Saint-Simon; methodology; the study of civilizations; and an initial section reviewing monographs and, significantly by this time the *Manuels* or textbooks of sociology, which were made up of extracts from already published works.

This is followed by an extensive section on not the sociology of religion, but the subtly but significantly different 'Sociologie religieuse', including the history of religions, a fourfold division into the religious systems of preliterate societies, of national entities (Ancient Egypt and the Israelites for example), universal religions and "secondary' religious phenomena, here meaning sects, folklore and popular religion, beliefs and rites relating to death, magic, ritual, religious representations, which includes the depiction of sacred beings and mythology, and finally a section on religious organization referring to monastic organization and other forms of corporate religious entity. The third section of the *Analyses* comprises 'Sociologie morale et juridique' with sub-sections on legal and moral systems, domestic and matrimonial law, political organizations, classes, penal law, international law and judicial organizations and procedures. The fourth section comprises 'Sociologie criminelle et statistique morale' including general studies in criminology, crime in relation to other social factors such as religion, age and gender, and the study of prisons and the treatment of delinquents. The fifth and by now very extensive section is that of economic sociology which now contains no less than twelve sub-sections, including methodoloy, economic systems, forms and functioning of productive systems, classes and systems of distribution. The sixth section 'Morphologie sociale' consists of reviews of books on social geography, population, migration, urban and rural communities and economic geography. The seventh and final section (*Divers*) has only three sections - language and writing, technology and aesthetics. What is certainly apparent even by the 1920s is the volume and variety of publications that were appearing in the social sciences, so many in fact that in the Second Series the long reviews characteristic of the First Series are supplemented with short 'Notices' or brief reviews and in some cases just a listing of books received. In this respect, too, by the Second series the *Année sociologique* had established itself as a model for the ways in which the scholarly journal would evolve and stucture itself.

What this historical evolution suggests is a certain but not absolute degree of convergence between French and Anglo-American sociology. Even by 1923 some of the categories would have seemed alien to an English speaker. This convergence, influenced to some extent no doubt by the rather rapid internationalisation of sociology after the First World War, is also signalled by the decline in the usage of certain favoured terms in the first two series of the *Année sociologique*. In particular we refer to the adjective *collective* (Lukes 1971). At the same time a rapid if experimental modernization of the language of sociology is apparent, indicated by the absorption into other sub-headings or the dropping altogether of certain rather antique categories such as 'l'anthropologie criminelle', which in the first volume comprised 'le crime et les races', 'facteurs particuliers du crime', 'formes spéciales du délit' (i.e. vagabonds, sects and the occult), 'l'argot' and 'questions diverses', which included the intriguing issue of criminals in art. A similarly soon abandoned category was the slightly mysterious 'anthroposociologie' which in the first volume included reviews of work on social selection, the cephalic index, racial factors in society and the Aryans.

Finally we must briefly turn to an examination of the relationships between the developing classificatory scheme and the overall intentions of the editors of the *Année sociologique* and in particular Durkheim during the early phase and Mauss during the middle and later phases. The *Année sociologique* was undoubtedly a remarkable collective project and a true collaboration amongst its editors (all who consistently contributed were *éditeurs*) who formed a very stable group and from which emerged many of the leading names of French sociology, anthropology and related sciences. What we see in the *Année sociologique*, and one of the things that makes it so interesting, is a genuine project - an experiment in action in which a collective of very talented individuals were struggling to define a constellation of disciplines still in their emergent forms and for which no standardised classifications as yet existed. The examination of these categories consequently is not just an academic enterprise, but represents in action the actual process of the formulation of new fields of knowledge, fields which have subsequently been of enormous influence both within and outside of the academy.

A reading of the preface to the first volume of the *Année sociologique* reveals that from the beginning the *Analyses* were more central to the purpose of systematically surveying the domain of the social sciences than were the *Mémoires originaux*. The activity of reviewing was seen as a major and constructive contribution to the formation and creation of a sound foundation for these emergent sciences, even when this reviewing involved the examination of works of mediocrity. Although the reviews were normally signed, Durkheim always persisted in regarding the activity of publishing the *Année sociologique* to be essentially collective, and, despite his obviously large influence on the form and content of contributions, free from direct editorial interference (Davy 1960, Lukes 1973:292-295). This aspect of the journal is also reflected in the catholic nature of its geographical spread of reviews, which covered works in all the major European languages, including numerous journal articles and other relatively ephemeral material. As Durkheim carefully notes in the preface to volume 2, sociology was intended to be a radical and revitalizing influence amongst the existing special sciences of society, one which synthesises diverse material and points to the existence of laws underlying the phenomenal aspects of social life. The whole project of the *Année sociologique* points to the removal of arbitrary boundaries of the disciplines of social study, and their replacement by new, evolving and analytically more useful categorizations of classes of phenomena and their relationships, a project clearly set out by Durkheim in the preface to the first volume (Durkheim 1898a:v-vii). The success of the enterprise can be assessed both by referring back to the history of the evolution of the classificatory scheme, and by looking forward to the profound influence of the journal, both at the time of its inception and development, on succeeding generations of sociologists and anthropologists and even further into fields such as sinology (e.g. Granet 1922/1975).

One little acknowledged source for the study of the categories of sociological knowledge as expounded in the *Année sociologique* is the essay by Mauss, published in the second volume of the second series of the journal under the title of ‘Divisions et proportions des divisions de la sociologie’ (Mauss 1927:95-176). In it Mauss sets out his editorial manifesto, largely in terms of adherence to the pattern established by Durkheim, but with nuances of his own. First, amongst these is the nature of the social morphology section, which groups together subjects not normally associated, the juxtaposition of which however, in Mauss’s view, reveals unexpected relationships both to each other and to the more obviously and specifically sociological enterprise (essentially as set out by Durkheim in the *Rules of Sociological Method*). Secondly, there is the recognition by Mauss of the unsuitability of banishing the technological, aesthetic and linguistic subjects to the tail-end category of ‘miscellaneous’. Thirdly, there is the necessity of elaborating the principles upon which the complex ‘general sociology’ category and its component parts are ordered, and how the other works (the books and monographs) of the *Année sociologique* school are related to and reflect this ordering, a grasp of which illuminates the general theoretical and methodological contributions of the journal to the social sciences.

Once these preliminary points have been made under the rubric of ‘Ordre des parties de la sociologie’, Mauss moves on to a deeper consideration of the significance of the contents of the various divisions under the title of ‘Sur les proportions des parties de la sociologie’. This exercise has a number of objectives, and in particular it affords Mauss the opportunity to redress once again the unfavourable and relatively insignificant role into which linguistics and aesthetics had been assigned in the first series of the journal. It also enables Mauss to reflect critically on and ultimately defend the overall classification of sociological knowledge established in the first series with these particular exceptions. This critical distance and reflexivity about categories of which Mauss himself was, at least in part, the author (although the guarded and veiled criticism of Durkheim’s hand in their evolution can also be discerned), makes it possible for him to plunge into a detailed discussion of the notion of the ‘collective’ in the language of the *Année sociologique* and to extend that in turn through a discussion of the history of the classificatory scheme to a much broader discussion of what he calls the ‘Division concrete de la sociologie’. 


This essay has focused on one important but neglected aspect of the *Année sociologique* - the evolution within its pages of what has proved to be an enormously influential scheme for classifying and grouping sociological knowledge. Many questions about the influence of the durkheimian tradition still need to be addressed. In one way this is particularly difficult since so much of that tradition has been internalized that many of the categories first formed by the members of the journal's editorial collective now seem entirely natural and form the largely unquestioned framework around which introductory textbooks are written, conferences structured, and academic departments sub-divided. These categories however are not natural, and they were at the point that sociology was attempting at its beginning to establish itself as a discipline worthy of a place in the university curriculum in the face of opposition. What is particularly significant however in the context of the *Année sociologique* was that this confrontation was internal and was conducted not between rival sociological communities, but within a single and collaborative movement. The journal consequently stands as the source of many of the fundamental sub-divisions of contemporary sociology and anthropology, the ones that we work with and argue from today. They are a refreshing alternative to contemporary postmodernism as it articulates a not overtly political, but rather deeply moral vision of the nature and contribution of sociology, and as a remarkable sociological movement in itself, which one hopes will receive the fuller treatment that it so richly deserves. Certainly worthy of note was its much more inclusive and multilingual conception of anthropology and sociology and indeed of the social sciences collectively and of the role of the scholarly journal than nowadays generally prevails. Its wide historical range, comparative emphasis, willingness to directly address questions of morality in a scientific manner and its constant attempts to link the sociological to the geographical, psychological and economic dimensions should if nothing else give the *Année sociologique* a prominent position in the history of scholarly publishing. Its continuing influence on French sociology in particular is not only evident in the contemporary continuation of the journal, but also, in a more underground way, on the ways in which its formulations of the fields of sociological knowledge still prevail (Lemert 1981). Its role in the establishment and recognition of sociology and social anthropology as disciplines can hardly be overemphasised and its place within the development of the modern French university system and on the careers of what Clark (1973) calls a 'cluster' of prominent intellectuals in several fields was profound. What is probably most important was however, as this essay has stressed, the formulation of a particular conception of sociology in an institutional and intellectual environment in which the success of the particular durkheimian vision was by no means assured.

